content/contact.md, before:

+++
published = 2019-10-20T20:31:11.792Z
title = "Become a partner"
description = "Contact Spotlight PA about stories, tips and how to become a partner."
title-tag = "Contact Us"
linktitle = "Contact Us"
type = "root"
modal-exclude = true
+++
Spotlight PA was created to provide news organizations across Pennsylvania quality, in-depth investigative reporting on the state government and issues of statewide importance. We're eager to expand our network of distribution partners and provide all of our work **free of charge** to other newsrooms. To become a distribution partner, please contact Joanna Zuckerman Bernstein at [joanna@spotlightpa.org](mailto:joanna@spotlightpa.org).

<div class="my-12">
{{<featured/promo-contact-form
  hed="General inquiries"
  dek="For news tips, please see [our tips page](/tips/). For technical problems, please email [webmaster@spotlightpa.org](mailto:webmaster@spotlightpa.org). For general comments, please use the form below. Other submissions, including press releases or events, will not receive a response."
  submit="Send Inquiry"
>}}
</div>

Commit message:

updates contact page content (#430)
* updates contact page content

* updates copy

* removes period -- https://github.com/spotlightpa/poor-richard/pull/430#discussion_r1228498877

content/contact.md, after:

+++
published = 2019-10-20T20:31:11.792Z
title = "Contact Us"
description = "Contact Spotlight PA about stories, tips and how to become a partner."
title-tag = "Contact Us"
linktitle = "Contact Us"
type = "root"
modal-exclude = true
+++
We're eager to hear from you about our work. For general inquiries, use the form below or check out our [staff page](/about/staff) to contact someone in particular. You can also write to us at:

Spotlight PA <br>
PO Box 11728<br>
Harrisburg, PA 17108-1728

For questions about your membership, including how to change or cancel a gift, email [membership@spotlightpa.org](mailto:membership@spotlightpa.org).

For more information on supporting Spotlight PA, visit our [Ways to Give](/support) page.

<div class="my-12">
{{<featured/promo-contact-form
  hed="General inquiries"
  dek="For news tips, please see [our tips page](/tips/). For technical problems, please email [webmaster@spotlightpa.org](mailto:webmaster@spotlightpa.org). For general comments, please use the form below. Other submissions, including press releases or events, will not receive a response."
  submit="Send Inquiry"
>}}
</div>

## Become a partner

Spotlight PA was created to provide news organizations across Pennsylvania quality, in-depth investigative reporting on the state government and issues of statewide importance. We're eager to expand our network of distribution partners and provide all of our work **free of charge** to other newsrooms. To become a distribution partner, please contact Skyler Cruz at [skyler@spotlightpa.org](mailto:skyler@spotlightpa.org).
