+++
authors = ["Amanda Fries"]
byline = "Amanda Fries of Spotlight PA Berks"
description = "Fries is the new regional accountability reporter for Spotlight PA’s Berks bureau"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/05/01m3-kq27-rj1c-9ber.jpeg"
image-credit = "Amanda Fries / Spotlight PA Berks"
image-description = "Author headshot for Amanda Fries"
internal-id = "SPLFRIES0625"
kicker = "Berks"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-06-04T05:00:00-04:00
slug = "meet-amanda-fries-berks-reporter"
suppress-date = false
title = "Meet Amanda Fries, regional accountability reporter for Spotlight PA Berks"
title-tag = "Meet Amanda Fries, reporter for Spotlight PA Berks"
topics = ["Berks County"]
+++

Hi there! I’m Amanda Fries, the regional government and institutions reporter for Spotlight PA’s Berks Bureau, and I’m thrilled to bring investigative journalism to the Berks County community.

Before joining Spotlight PA, I was the Wilmington and Delaware state government watchdog reporter for Delaware Online/The News Journal for four years, producing award-winning investigative coverage of botched school drinking water testing for lead, landlord-tenant issues, and government operations.

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

My proudest accomplishment was reporting on elevated lead levels in school drinking water, which prompted a statewide retesting of drinking water sources and, for the first time, state funding for childhood lead poisoning prevention. It also sparked a powerful, human interest read: an investigative report on how lead poisoning could have been prevented in one Wilmington child.

Over my 14 years covering communities in New York State and Delaware, I’ve revealed nepotism in Albany County politics, fraud in federal government housing, illegal narcotic distribution at large nonprofits, and improper financial reporting in gubernatorial races.

Now I finally get to bring these skills and dogged determination for the truth to my hometown.

I grew up in Chester County and graduated from Temple University in 2010. Many of my family and friends live in Berks. Growing up, back-to-school shopping wasn’t complete without a trip to the Reading outlets. Now, Berks is the must-stop location for the best greenhouses and fresh, local produce. There may also be some coffee shops I regularly visit.

That’s all to say, I’m so excited to bring much-needed accountability and transparency to what’s going on in the Berks County community.

You may have noticed, I already started. During my time freelancing for Spotlight PA, I reported on the <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/berks/2024/10/pennsylvania-oley-valley-right-school-board-moms-liberty/">conflicts with one school board in Oley</a>, spoke to <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/berks/2024/11/antietam-flood-community-division-berks-county/">Antietam School District families</a> about recovering after the flood, and revealed the <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/berks/2025/01/berks-albright-college-deficit-art-sale/">financial struggles Albright College</a> is facing. I’m looking to build on those stories and more.

{{<embed/donate>}}

I know there’s much ground to cover, but rest assured your neighbor has your back! So don’t be a stranger and drop me a line. I’m ready to hear what issues you believe deserve deep dives. We’ll get to the truth together.

You can reach me at <a href="mailto:afries@spotlightpa.org">afries@spotlightpa.org</a>.

- Amanda

