+++
authors = ["Lisa Scheid"]
blurb = "Edwin Salgado is a case manager whose work in sober living helps families unite."
byline = "Lisa Scheid of Spotlight PA"
description = "Edwin Salgado helps residents at the Reading YMCA get their lives on track."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/08/01m8-tac5-rt3x-53px.jpeg"
image-caption = "Edwin Salgado is a case manager at YMCA of Reading and Berks County"
image-credit = "Courtesy of YMCA of Reading and Berks County"
image-description = "Photo of Edwin Salgado"
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "SPLSALGADO0825"
kicker = "Community Profile"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-08-04T07:00:00-04:00
slug = "reading-ymca-edwin-salgado-profile-community-profile"
suppress-date = false
title = "Meet a Berks County case manager helping to bring families together"
title-tag = "This Berks County case manager helps bring families together"
topics = ["Community Profile", "Berks County"]
+++

<em>This article originally appeared in Good Day, Berks — </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><em>Spotlight PA’s</em></a><em> free daily newsletter for Berks County and your daily dose of Berks County essentials. </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters/gooddayberks/"><em>Sign up here</em></a><em>.</em>

This week&#39;s Community Spotlight honoree is Edwin Salgado, a 49-year-old intensive case manager for the Hacia Adelante Program and the single room occupancy manager for the YMCA of Reading and Berks County.

This conversation, which took place over email, has been edited for length and clarity.

<strong>Good Day, Berks: Where do you live?</strong>

Edwin Salgado: Reading.

<strong>Tell us a little about your family.</strong>

I have 3 children. My son is 26 years old, my oldest daughter is 24 years old, and my youngest daughter is 17 years old.

<strong>Tell us about your work (volunteer and/or otherwise) and what you like about it</strong>.

I have worked for the YMCA for almost 9 years and been involved with the YMCA for a total of almost 12 years. My first 90 days of sobriety were in the STOP Program of the YMCA. I enjoy the fact that I assist the residents of my community to become productive and responsible people. I am proud to know that I am a cog in a machine that provides the resources and tools needed to unify families throughout my community.

<strong>Tell us about a challenge you faced.</strong>

One of the challenges of my field is watching someone not utilizing the resources and tools provided for them to have a successful outcome to their situation. Observing the progressive degradation and negative outcome of their life until the end, while still motivating them for change, was difficult.

<strong>Where would you take a visitor to Berks and why?</strong>

The Wyomissing Farmers Market. I love that place! It just encompasses everything that is grown in the soil that is good in PA in one place. Plus, CHOCOLATE!

<strong>What book, poem, song, or artwork is meaningful to you?</strong>

<em>Nefertiti Bust </em>by Thutmose. This bust of Queen Nefertiti is beautiful. If this bust was a representation of the Queen&#39;s beauty, then she was stunningly gorgeous. The way the head is positioned with a slight up tilt of royalty. The expression of seriousness and yet understanding. A look of regality.

<strong>Who in your life has had a great influence on you, and how did they influence you?</strong>

There are so many people that took the time to invest and continue to invest in my person today. From my ancestors who watch over me on my Red Road while having instilled self-pride, knowledge of self, and spirituality, to people that detected me, inspected me, and corrected me in a manner that helps me to continue to be an agent of change. I would like to say thank you to my colleagues at the YMCA who keep me grounded. Especially Ryan H. for lighting my path with critical thinking and Ms. Gena for showing me what a firm hand in a velvet glove is.

<em>This positive news for Berks County is made possible thanks to a generous grant from the United Way of Berks County, which is celebrating 100 years of service to the community. </em><a href="https://spotlightpa.bluelena.io/lt.php?x=3DZy~GDMVaSa5H350_tFguBv1HIivQAiku0zkHo6InOfEpJ5yky.0OFr1X_ziN9vkfY4bHPJInKg"><strong><em>Learn more here </em></strong></a><strong><em>| </em></strong><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support/"><strong><em>Become a supporter of Spotlight PA here. </em></strong></a><em></em>
