+++
authors = ["Lisa Scheid"]
blurb = "Jennifer Ermler is a care manager whose work helps older adults find support in Berks County."
byline = "Lisa Scheid of Spotlight PA"
description = "Jennifer Ermler helps older adults find services through the Berks County Area Agency on Aging."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/07/01m7-dbdr-xws4-7b0q.jpeg"
image-caption = "Jennifer Ermler is a care manager with the options program of the Berks County Area Agency on Aging."
image-credit = "Courtesy of Jennifer Ermler"
image-description = "Photo of Jennifer Ermler"
internal-id = "SPLERMLER0825"
kicker = "Community profile"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-08-18T07:00:00-04:00
slug = "aging-berks-jennifer-ermler-profile-community-profile"
suppress-date = false
title = "Meet a Berks County woman connecting older adults to services"
title-tag = "This Berks County counselor helps connect older adults to services"
topics = ["Community Profile"]
+++

<em>This article originally appeared in Good Day, Berks — </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><em>Spotlight PA’s</em></a><em> free daily newsletter for Berks County and your daily dose of Berks County essentials. </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters/gooddayberks/"><em>Sign up here</em></a><em>.</em>

This week&#39;s Community Spotlight honoree is Jennifer Ermler, a 47-year-old care manager from South Heidelberg Township.

<em>This conversation, which took place over email, has been edited for length and clarity.</em>

<strong>Good Day, Berks:</strong> Where do you live?

Jennifer Ermler<strong>: </strong>South Heidelberg Township.

<strong>Tell us a little about your family.</strong>

My family includes my partner, Robert, my mom, Robert’s mom, my goddaughters in Pittsburgh,

the Kopetskys, my extended family, the Kleins, my uncle in Detroit, and my chosen family in Florida, along with two lifelong friends that have become like my sisters, Lara and Mary.

<strong>Tell us about your work (volunteer and/or otherwise) and what you like about it.</strong>

As a care manager in the Options program at the Berks County Area Agency on Aging, I enjoy that every day is a little different — from the schedule and structure of the day to the daily tasks.

The work pushes me out of my comfort zone and challenges me to think on my feet, be assertive, and provide varying degrees of support and knowledge in various circumstances for individuals. My tasks and responsibilities are varied and extensive: from assisting people to receive meals delivered to their homes to connecting older adults with in-home companionship services and other in-home services that allow them to remain independently in their own homes for as long as possible.

I work with clients all around Berks County, who I get to know as they share their stories and experiences with me. I also get to provide family members and caretakers with information, reassurance, and peace of mind that resources and services are available and prioritized toward the older adults in our community.

<strong>Tell us about a challenge you faced.</strong>

A challenge I’ve faced in my job is providing assistance and support to clients and their families who are faced with or experiencing progressive cognitive diagnoses, including Alzheimer’s and dementia. My grandmother had dementia for many years, and it was a challenging diagnosis. Not only did the diagnosis change her life, but it also impacted my young adult life as I adapted to support a grandparent facing this challenging and life-changing disease.

I can personally understand what the families of the older adults I care manage are going through and experiencing. Sometimes I reexperience the challenges and realities these diagnoses have not only on the individual with the diagnosis, but also for the family, loved ones, and support system.

<strong>What’s your favorite place to eat in Berks County and why?</strong>

Tokyo Hibachi in Wyomissing — they have great food, service, and a show with the hibachi presentation! There are lots of options for anyone on the extensive menu!

<strong>Where would you take a visitor to Berks and why?</strong>

The Fairgrounds Farmers Market in Muhlenberg. I grew up in Muhlenberg and went there almost every weekend. It has all kinds of Berks County food and more all under one roof. It is like a mini-reunion every time I go, as I see people from Muhlenberg and those I grew up with.

<strong>What book, poem, song, or artwork is meaningful to you?</strong>

“Imagine” by John Lennon. I have loved this song for as long as I can remember. It is a simple song with a simple message that resonates now more than ever. It promotes a message of humanity while expressing hope.

<strong>Who has had a great influence on you in your life, and how have they influenced you?</strong>

My maternal great aunt, Jackie, grew up in a time when she was not fully able to express her true individual self. But nonetheless, she conducted herself with humility, courage, and kindness. She taught me to be accepting of all people, take time to laugh or make someone else laugh, and how to brighten someone’s day. She liked to be silly, to have fun, and take moments to enjoy herself.<strong></strong>

<em>This positive news for Berks County is made possible thanks to a generous grant from the United Way of Berks County, which is celebrating 100 years of service to the community. </em><a href="https://spotlightpa.bluelena.io/lt.php?x=3DZy~GDMVaSa5H350_tFguBv1HIivQAiku0zkHo6InOfEpJ5yky.0OFr1X_ziN9vkfY4bHPJInKg"><strong><em>Learn more here </em></strong></a><strong><em>| </em></strong><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support/"><strong><em>Become a supporter of Spotlight PA here.</em></strong></a>

