+++
authors = ["Amanda Fries", "Gabriela Martínez"]
blurb = "The warehouse, located at 3501 Mountain Road in Upper Bern Township, was sold to the United States government on behalf of the Department of Homeland Security and ICE."
byline = "Amanda Fries and Gabriela Martínez of Spotlight PA"
description = "Deed records show the Trump administration purchased a 520,000-square-foot warehouse in Hamburg, PA, for $87.4 million on Feb. 2."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2026/02/01mr-1kz5-dw0k-zrd1.jpeg"
image-caption = "A warehouse in Upper Bern Township, Berks County, PA, was purchased by ICE and the Trump administration."
image-credit = "Gabriela Martínez / Spotlight PA"
image-description = "A warehouse in Upper Bern Township, Berks County, PA, was purchased by ICE and the Trump administration."
internal-id = "SPLICESALE0226"
kicker = "Federal Government"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-02-02T12:06:11.49-05:00
slug = "ice-warehouse-berks-county-purchase-federal-government"
suppress-date = false
title = "ICE buys $87M warehouse in Berks County as it plots expansion of immigration detention centers across the U.S."
title-tag = "ICE buys $87M warehouse in Berks County"
topics = ["Federal Government"]
+++

<strong><em>&gt;&gt;READ MORE: </em></strong><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/berks/2026/02/ice-warehouse-immigration-berks-county-hamburg-plans-federal-government/"><strong><em>Everything you need to know about ICE’s plan to open a detention center in Berks County</em></strong></a><strong><em></em></strong>

UPPER BERN — The Trump administration has quietly purchased a nearly 520,000-square-foot warehouse in Berks County as it plans to convert such facilities into immigration detention centers across the U.S.

The warehouse, located at 3501 Mountain Road in Upper Bern Township, was sold to the U.S. government on behalf of the Department of Homeland Security and ICE for $87.4 million, <a href="https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/26777680-14875047-274862804-docimage-actual/">deed records show</a>. The purchase was recorded on Feb. 2.

Spotlight PA visited the warehouse, which is located about a mile from I-78, on Jan. 15 and witnessed about two dozen individuals touring the exterior of the building. One man who arrived early to the site that day identified himself to a reporter as ICE.

The property was most recently called the Hamburg Logistics Center, and before that was the site of the Mountain Springs Arena, a county landmark known for rodeos and demolition derbies. It neighbors an Amazon warehouse and the Mountain Springs Camping Resort.

The building is one of at least 23 that <a href="https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2026-01-29/us-spends-hundreds-of-millions-on-warehouses-for-ice-detention-centers">ICE plans to convert</a> into an immigration detention facility, Bloomberg reports. The Berks County warehouse could house up to 1,500 beds.

ICE also finalized the purchase of a warehouse in nearby Tremont Township, in Schuylkill County, on Monday, according to a deed. The Tremont property is located less than 300 yards from a daycare center and has already <a href="https://www.wvia.org/news/local/2026-01-30/plans-for-ice-detention-center-in-schuylkill-county-draw-angry-concerned-residents-to-town-hall">faced</a> fierce resident opposition.

A spokesperson for ICE did not answer any questions about the Berks County warehouse purchase and instead lauded the agency’s targeting of “vicious criminals.”

“Thanks to the One Big Beautiful Bill, ICE has new funding to expand detention space to keep these criminals off American streets before they are removed for good from our communities,” the spokesperson said.

Upper Bern Township’s solicitor said in an emailed statement that community leaders learned about the sale on Monday. They declined to answer questions.

“The township was not involved in this transfer and has not received any applications from either the prior or new owners regarding the future use of the property,” the statement reads. “The township has no further comment on this matter at this time.”

State Sen. Chris Gebhard and Rep. Jamie Barton, Republicans who represent the area, said they have reached out to federal contacts to gather more information on how the Department of Homeland Security plans to use the warehouse.

“Our immediate concerns include the potential loss of property tax revenue for the host municipality, county, and school district, as well as security and perimeter considerations,” the lawmakers said in a joint statement. “We look forward to engaging directly with the appropriate federal officials to address these issues. Once additional information is available, we will provide an update.”

The property is assessed at $22 million and currently pays $198,286 annually in county property taxes under the current tax rate of 9.013 mils. Combined with Hamburg Area School District and township taxes, the loss of tax revenue from the federal government’s purchase would be about $624,000.

State Sen. Judy Schwank (D., Berks) declined to comment on the warehouse purchase on Monday. In an earlier interview with Spotlight PA, she called the then-potential sale “deeply concerning,” especially given the reports of mistreatment of people detained in ICE facilities. She <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/DUB6rSzj1v3/">released a statement</a> about “ICE’s action in Minneapolis” on Jan. 27, shortly after federal agents killed Alex Pretti.

“My concern is, knowing the track record of some of these other facilities located throughout the country, it&#39;s not good,” she said. “I don&#39;t necessarily want to see something like that being housed in our county.”

The deed finalized on Monday shows the property was sold to ICE by an LLC connected to PCCP, a national commercial real estate equity firm. The firm <a href="https://traded.co/deals/pennsylvania/industrial/sale/3501-mountain-road/">purchased</a> the warehouse in 2024 for $57.5 million, deed records show.

Reached by phone Monday afternoon, PCCP partner Greg Eberhardt — who is the authorized signatory for 3501 Mountain Road Owner LLC on the latest deed — denied knowledge of the property and its sale, and refused to comment further.

“I have no idea what you’re talking about,” Eberhardt said before hanging up on a Spotlight PA reporter. “I’m not making company comments.”

Upper Bern Township is situated on the edge of Berks and Schuylkill Counties, with a population of roughly 1,600 people. The community is mostly white, with only 2.8% of residents identifying as another race, according to the 2020 census.

Bridget Cambria, attorney with Aldea, a nonprofit that provides pro bono immigration legal services, said the detention center will have a “disruptive” and “chilling” impact on Berks County’s immigrant community.

“If there are people that live freely and at peace knowing that they do the right thing, they can do their immigration process or stay with their family or figure out a way to legalize their status, they&#39;re going to be more afraid to do that with a giant detention center in their backyard,” Cambria said.

<a href="https://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/default/files/reports/If%20You%20Build%20It%2C%20ICE%20Will%20Fill%20IT_Report_2022.pdf">A 2022 study by the Detention Watch Center</a> and the Immigrant Legal Resource Center found that immigrants were more likely to be arrested by ICE in counties with more detention bed-space.

