+++
blurb = "ICE’s letters to the Shapiro administration don’t detail what the feds plan to do with the warehouses instead."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "ICE’s letters to the Shapiro administration don’t detail what the feds plan to do with the warehouses instead."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2026/04/01my-1x6v-vdb6-2y24.jpeg"
image-credit = "Margo Reed / For Spotlight PA"
image-description = "View of warehouse at 3501 Mountain Road in Upper Bern Township."
internal-id = "SPLDETLET0726"
kicker = "Federal Government"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-07-22T19:02:17.968-04:00
slug = "ice-detention-centers-pennsylvania-blocked-shapiro-federal-government"
suppress-ads = false
suppress-date = false
title = "ICE tells Shapiro administration it won’t use Pa. warehouses as detention centers"
title-tag = "ICE confirms it won’t use PA warehouses as detention centers"
topics = ["Federal Government", "Local Government"]
+++

READING — ICE has informed the Shapiro administration that it will not use two warehouses it purchased in Pennsylvania as detention centers.

It did so in two <a href="https://www.pa.gov/content/dam/copapwp-pagov/en/governor/documents/DHS%20Ingalsbe%20Upper%20Bern-Tremonth%20letters%20to%20DEP.pdf">letters</a> sent to the state Department of Environmental Protection earlier this month and released Wednesday by the governor’s office.

In March, DEP issued administrative orders barring the federal Department of Human Services from connecting to water or sewer at the warehouses in Upper Bern Township, Berks County, and Tremont, Schuylkill County, until it complied with state environmental laws. DHS appealed the orders, setting off what could have been a lengthy legal process.

Instead, DHS filed a notice Wednesday saying it had <a href="https://efiling.ehb.pa.gov/docket-search/docket/2026030">withdrawn</a> its appeal.

{{<embed/newsletter button="Sign me up!" cta="Good Day, Berks is your daily dose of Berks County essentials. Be the first to know about important news, events, and more." preselect="berks">}}

In June, the New York Times reported that the Trump administration planned to sell or give away seven of the 11 warehouses purchased over the past year as part of a sweeping $38.3 billion <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/berks/2026/02/ice-detention-warehouses-berks-pennsylvania-reengineering-federal-government/">plan to expand detention capacity</a>. Local and state officials at the time said they were in the dark about what would happen next.

The two letters sent to DEP earlier this month state that, “ICE has considered the final use it will make of this Property, and it hereby informs DEP that it will not be using this Property as a detention center.”

However, the letters do not detail what ICE plans to do with the buildings. “ICE’s plan is that it will maintain the use of the property on existing sewage planning, sewage flows, and drinking water use levels,” the letters say.

In a statement, Gov. Josh Shapiro said his administration opposed converting the warehouses into detention centers, as doing so “would have posed serious risks to the health, safety, and infrastructure of the surrounding communities.” Estimates from the <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/berks/2026/04/ice-detention-center-pennsylvania-blocked-environmental-violations-appeal-federal-government/">DEP</a> found the Berks County facility alone would <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/berks/2026/02/ice-detention-center-burden-federal-government/">produce as much as 100,000 gallons </a>of sewage per day, which would overwhelm the local system.

&#34;My Administration stood with local leaders and residents, enforced Pennsylvania law, and worked across agencies to protect people from being held in these warehouses and to protect the surrounding communities,” Shapiro continued.

<em>This story will be updated.</em>

