+++
arc-id = "R2W6Z4GTVJGE5O7L73B43K46PY"
internal-id = "SPLOPEN02"
internal-budget = ""
image = "external/4hhzwdrk39j1v3600v3eqcae8m.jpeg"
image-description = "Gov. Tom Wolf has allowed some sectors including construction to resume activities."
image-caption = ""
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-size = ""
published = 2020-05-01T17:19:30Z
slug = "pennsylvania-counties-reopen-full-list-may-8"
authors = ["Angela Couloumbis, Staff Writer", "Cynthia Fernandez"]
byline = "Angela Couloumbis of Spotlight PA and Cynthia Fernandez of Spotlight PA"
title = "Pa. will ease coronavirus restrictions in 24 northwest, north-central counties as reopening process begins"
subtitle = ""
description = "Gov. Tom Wolf on Friday announced that these counties can enter the “yellow” phase and start a limited reopening on May 8."
blurb = "Gov. Tom Wolf on Friday announced that these counties can enter the “yellow” phase and start a limited reopening on May 8."
kicker = "Coronavirus"
topics = ["Coronavirus"]
series = ["Top News"]
linktitle = ""
suppress-featured = false
weight = 0
url = ""
aliases = []
modal-exclude = false
no-index = false
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i><b>Spotlight PA</b></i></a><i> is an independent, nonpartisan newsroom powered by The Philadelphia Inquirer in partnership with the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and PennLive/Patriot-News. </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><i>Sign up for our free weekly newsletter</i></a><i>.</i>

HARRISBURG — The Wolf administration will begin its reopening experiment next week in large swaths of northern Pennsylvania, the first step in a tiered plan to gradually lift sweeping orders that have shut down nearly every aspect of daily life. 

Gov. Tom Wolf on Friday announced that 24 northwest and north-central counties can enter the “yellow” phase of his color-coded reopening plan on May 8. 

The counties allowed to do so are Bradford, Cameron, Centre, Clarion, Clearfield, Clinton, Crawford, Elk, Erie, Forest, Jefferson, Lawrence, Lycoming, McKean, Mercer, Montour, Northumberland, Potter, Snyder, Sullivan, Tioga, Union, Venango, and Warren. He did not provide a timeline for reopening other counties.

<iframe title="Pennsylvania Begins to Reopen" aria-label="USA pennsylvania counties choropleth map" id="datawrapper-chart-ua5rg" src="//datawrapper.dwcdn.net/ua5rg/2/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="600"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}})}();
</script>

There will still be restrictions in the yellow phase. Large social gatherings will be banned and many of the activities of daily life, from working to shopping to socializing, will still be curtailed. And should there be an uptick in cases, the governor said he would move swiftly to reinstate strict closure and stay-at-home orders.

But in his mid-afternoon briefing Friday, Wolf tried to strike a positive note, crediting the willingness of residents across the state to stay home for slowing the spread of the virus.

“Over the past two months, Pennsylvanians in every corner of our commonwealth have acted collectively to stop the spread of COVID-19,” the governor said. “Each of these actions seem small individually, but taken together, they built a very powerful weapon against COVID-19. Working together, we Pennsylvanians have flattened the curve.”

In the yellow phase, companies will have to continue providing teleworking options to employees if their work can be done remotely. If they don’t have that ability, they will be able to reopen with certain safety precautions, which will be announced next week.

Child care operations can resume — also under guidelines that will be announced next week — and retail stores can reopen to customers, though curbside pickup and delivery remains preferable and certain safety precautions must be taken.

Gyms, theaters, indoor recreation centers, hair and nail salons, and schools will remain closed, and gatherings of more than 25 people will be prohibited. Restaurants and bars will only be permitted to remain open for takeout. Casinos will also remain shuttered.

<script src="https://www.spotlightpa.org/embed.js" async></script><div data-spl-embed-version="1" data-spl-src="https://www.spotlightpa.org/embeds/donate/"></div>


The governor stressed that if an outbreak occurs, his administration would quickly move to reinstate strict business closure and stay-at-home orders. If there is no spread, the next step would be the “green" phase, where most restrictions are lifted.

“If we see an outbreak occur in one of the communities that has been moved to yellow, we will need to take swift action, and revert to the red category until the new case count falls again,” Wolf said in a statement. "So, Pennsylvanians living in a county that has been moved to the yellow category should continue to strongly consider the impact of their actions.”

Wolf said the 24 counties were selected in part because of their low case counts and their ability to conduct testing and contact tracing. They also are largely in less densely populated areas of the state.

In March, Wolf shuttered much of the state’s economy and began implementing stay-at-home orders to prevent hospitals from being overwhelmed by cases of COVID-19. As GOP lawmakers pressured the governor to lift restrictions on some impacted sectors, Wolf announced he would allow construction to resume statewide and golf courses, campgrounds, and marinas to reopen, as long as precautions are taken on site.

Wolf has also increased the number of state-run wine and spirits stores that can offer curbside pickup.

Gordon Denlinger, state director of the National Federation of Independent Business, which represents 13,000 small businesses in the state, welcomed the news, as many mom-and-pop shops are cash-strapped and have not received loans from the government.

“Being shuttered and having to lay off employees over the last month and a half has been very difficult for small business owners," he said. "We look forward to other areas of Pennsylvania following suit.”

<i>This story will be updated. </i>

<i>Spotlight PA reporter Aneri Pattani contributed to this story.</i>

<i><b>100% ESSENTIAL:</b></i> <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i>Spotlight PA</i></a><i> relies on</i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support"><i> funding from foundations and readers like you</i></a><i> who are committed to accountability journalism that gets results. If you value this reporting, please give a gift today at </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><i>spotlightpa.org/donate</i></a><i>.</i>

<script src="https://www.spotlightpa.org/embed.js" async></script><div data-spl-embed-version="1" data-spl-src="https://www.spotlightpa.org/embeds/tips/?tip_text=Do%20you%20have%20a%20tip%20about%20%3Cb%3Ehow%20Pa.'s%20government%20is%20responding%20to%20the%20coronavirus%3C%2Fb%3E%3F%20Tell%20us."></div>

