+++
arc-id = "XABTTPNH6JC7BOEERYXSORWAG4"
internal-id = "SPLGREEN06"
internal-budget = ""
image = "external/4hhzwdrk39j1v3600v3eqcae8m.jpeg"
image-description = "Gov. Tom Wolf in March closed all but “life-sustaining” businesses and incrementally put counties under stay-at-home orders to prevent COVID-19 from overwhelming hospitals."
image-caption = ""
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-size = ""
published = 2020-06-05T18:30:59Z
slug = "pennsylvania-green-counties-adams-york-beaver"
authors = ["Cynthia Fernandez"]
byline = "Cynthia Fernandez of Spotlight PA"
title = "12 more Pa. counties will be allowed to move to ‘green’ reopening phase"
subtitle = ""
description = "Adams, Beaver, Carbon, Columbia, Cumberland, Juniata, Mifflin, Northumberland, Union, Wayne, Wyoming, and York Counties will be allowed to ease most coronavirus restrictions on June 12."
blurb = "Adams, Beaver, Carbon, Columbia, Cumberland, Juniata, Mifflin, Northumberland, Union, Wayne, Wyoming, and York Counties will be allowed to ease most coronavirus restrictions on June 12."
kicker = "Coronavirus"
topics = ["Coronavirus"]
series = []
linktitle = ""
suppress-featured = false
weight = 0
url = ""
aliases = []
modal-exclude = false
no-index = false
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i><b>Spotlight PA</b></i></a><i> is an independent, nonpartisan newsroom powered by The Philadelphia Inquirer in partnership with the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and PennLive/Patriot-News. </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><i>Sign up for our free weekly newsletter</i></a><i>.</i>

HARRISBURG — Twelve more Pennsylvania counties will soon move to the “green” phase of Gov. Tom Wolf’s reopening plan.

Wolf on Friday announced that Adams, Beaver, Carbon, Columbia, Cumberland, Juniata, Mifflin, Northumberland, Union, Wayne, Wyoming, and York Counties will be allowed to ease most coronavirus restrictions on June 12. They will join 34 counties that are already in the green phase, which lifts most restrictions on businesses and residents.

Together, that represents roughly 40% of Pennsylvania’s population. The state’s most populous counties, including Philadelphia, its suburbs, and Lehigh, are now in the “yellow” phase, which lifts the most aggressive mitigation measures but still requires residents to limit the size of gatherings and keeps businesses like gyms and salons closed.

Wolf in March closed all but “life-sustaining” businesses and incrementally put counties under stay-at-home orders to prevent COVID-19 from overwhelming hospitals.

<i>This story will be updated. </i>

<i>Spotlight PA receives funding from nonprofit institutions and readers like you who are committed to investigative journalism that gets results. Give a gift today at </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><i>spotlightpa.org/donate</i></a><i>.</i>
