+++
arc-id = "BPLNMFERJJGJFA43PXEK42YR6Y"
authors = ["Joseph Darius Jaafari"]
blurb = "The State Police said they recovered a second gun at the scene, but it's unclear if it belonged to one of the activists or who fired it."
byline = "Joseph Darius Jaafari of Spotlight PA"
description = "The State Police said they recovered a second gun at the scene, but it's unclear if it belonged to one of the activists or who fired it."
image = "external/sz1eg206tp8a2wz5h3p4aj5v8m.jpeg"
image-credit = "YONG KIM / Philadelphia Inquirer"
image-description = "The Pennsylvania State Police are investigating who shot at peaceful civil rights marchers traveling through Pennsylvania on their way from Milwaukee to Washington, D.C."
internal-id = "SPLSHOT26"
kicker = "CRIME"
modal-exclude = false
no-index = false
published = 2020-08-25T11:13:19-04:00
slug = "pa-civil-rights-marchers-shot-bedford-county-milwaukee-washington-dc"
suppress-date = false
suppress-featured = false
title = "Civil rights marchers shot at in Pa. while on trek from Milwaukee to Washington, D.C."
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i><b>Spotlight PA</b></i></a><i> is an independent, nonpartisan newsroom powered by The Philadelphia Inquirer in partnership with PennLive/The Patriot-News, TribLIVE/Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, and WITF Public Media. </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><i>Sign up for our free weekly newsletter</i></a><i>.</i>

SHELLSBURG, Pa. –– The Pennsylvania State Police are investigating a shooting Monday evening involving two Bedford County residents and a group of civil rights activists on their way to Washington, D.C.

A caravan of about 50 activists were marching and driving from Milwaukee to the capital to arrive on the 57th anniversary of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech. They said that just before midnight Monday evening, a white man shot into the crowd as they gathered outside on Lincoln Highway.

Tory Lowe, one of the men marching, said they were about to climb a hill when a man appeared from behind them and started shooting at the group. A video of the shooting was broadcast over Facebook Live and shows the protesters gathered on the road before shots can be heard out of the camera’s range.

“We were about to start walking toward the hill; there was an incline coming up and we had parked to organize everybody,” Lowe said. “I don’t know, he came from almost a block away shooting. We didn’t even see it coming.”

A screenshot of the shooting posted on Facebook shows two men in front of a red and white truck, and one is holding a rifle. One marcher — a man known as Cino — was shot in the face, according to Lowe. He was treated and released Tuesday at Conemaugh Nason Medical Center near Bedford.

<iframe src="https://www.facebook.com/plugins/video.php?href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftory.lowe1%2Fvideos%2F10220699953541682%2F&show_text=0&width=267" width="267" height="476" style="border:none;overflow:hidden" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" allowTransparency="true" allowFullScreen="true"></iframe>

At a Tuesday afternoon news conference, State Police said they had recovered a second weapon at the scene, and they did not rule out that it could belong to the protesters. When asked who fired the second gun, officials declined to speculate.

“There was an exchange of gunfire, and that’s all the amount of information we’re willing to release at this time,” State Police Lt. William Slaton said.

While the marchers said on social media that the shooting felt racially motivated, Slaton said that “no one is insinuating that this situation here had any type of hate or racial animus to it.”

In a news release from earlier Tuesday, State Police said the shooting was sparked by “an argument, which culminated in gunfire.” According to a report from WTAJ, a property owner had repeatedly asked the marchers to leave, but they refused. Lowe disputed the contention that there had been an argument.

”It was no argument,” he said. “The video is proof. We weren’t arguing with anyone. He came out shooting off the top, never was an argument. Matter of fact we were walking when he started shooting.”

After the man shot his gun into the crowd, Lowe said, he yelled at the shooter that a minister was with him. Lowe said the shooter then put down his gun, started talking about Jesus, and then tried to shake his and the minister’s hands.

“After that, he acted like nothing ever happened,” Lowe said. “He just got to talking about us and shaking our hands and ‘God Bless You.’”

No arrests have been made and no charges have been filed.

<i><b>100% ESSENTIAL:</b></i> <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i>Spotlight PA</i></a><i> relies on</i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support"><i> funding from foundations and readers like you</i></a><i> who are committed to accountability journalism that gets results. If you value this reporting, please give a gift today at </i><a href="http://spotlightpa.org/donate"><i>spotlightpa.org/donate</i></a><i>.</i>
