+++
arc-id = "5FLSBYA36JANHM5AOKCXGNC33U"
internal-id = "SPLHOUSE09"
internal-budget = ""
image = "external/r1gpmzt1y0jt5ybshzprw48ehm.jpeg"
image-description = "Democrats on Monday blocked the start of a voting session in the state House to demand that the GOP allow police reform bills to move forward."
image-caption = ""
image-credit = "DAN GLEITER / PennLive"
image-size = "inline"
published = 2020-06-08T18:12:37Z
slug = "pennsylvania-george-floyd-protests-democrats-block-house-demand-action"
authors = ["Cynthia Fernandez"]
byline = "Cynthia Fernandez of Spotlight PA"
title = "Pa. House Democrats block start of voting session to demand police reforms from GOP"
subtitle = ""
description = "\"It’s the people’s house, and if we aren’t doing the people’s business, then we aren’t doing business,\" said Rep. Malcolm Kenyatta."
blurb = "\"It’s the people’s house, and if we aren’t doing the people’s business, then we aren’t doing business,\" said Rep. Malcolm Kenyatta."
kicker = "The Capitol"
topics = []
series = []
linktitle = ""
suppress-featured = false
weight = 0
url = ""
aliases = []
modal-exclude = false
no-index = false
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i><b>Spotlight PA</b></i></a><i> is an independent, nonpartisan newsroom powered by The Philadelphia Inquirer in partnership with the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and PennLive/Patriot-News. </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><i>Sign up for our free weekly newsletter</i></a><i>.</i>

HARRISBURG — State House Democrats on Monday took control of the chamber and refused to allow a voting session to begin, imploring Republican leadership to allow 19 bills enacting police reforms to move forward in the wake of the killing of George Floyd and widespread protests.

“For 13 days, folks have been protesting in the streets, demanding that we actually do something. Now we are here demanding that you actually do something,” Rep. Malcolm Kenyatta said in an impassioned speech, echoing other black lawmakers calling on Speaker Mike Turzai (R., Allegheny) to take action .

“You should come up from your seats, come up here and demand that we don’t get to business as usual,” Kenyatta (D., Philadelphia) told his white colleagues. “That we don’t get the same speeches and lip service. We demand that we get meaningful police reform passed out of the Pennsylvania House. It’s the people’s house, and if we aren’t doing the people’s business, then we aren’t doing business."

He added: “We can’t go back to normal. The folks in our districts cannot allow us to come back home and say that we introduced a bill. They need movement. They need movement."

Lawmakers knelt for 8 minutes and 46 seconds — the amount of time a police officer held his knee against George Floyd’s neck.

The official House video feed of the proceedings shows color bars, but Rep. Chris Rabb (D., Philadelphia) was <a href="https://www.facebook.com/RepRabb/videos/270365154114488/?v=270365154114488" target=_blank>streaming speeches live</a> on Facebook.

A spokesperson for the House minority whip said Democrats started speaking prior to the speaker arriving on the floor.

“As of now, there’s no motion or any procedural maneuver. They’re simply at the rostrum and refusing to leave. Session hasn’t officially started,” the spokesperson said.

<i>This story will be updated.</i>

<i>Spotlight PA receives funding from nonprofit institutions and readers like you who are committed to investigative journalism that gets results. Give a gift today at </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><i>spotlightpa.org/donate</i></a><i>.</i>
