+++
image = "external/25m8pdk32btw95t8mvamnfem30.jpeg"
image-description = "Health Secretary Rachel Levine previously said the state is “still seeing a significant number of young adults — some even in their 20s, 30s, and 40s — that have required hospitalization.”"
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-size = ""
published = 2020-03-26T16:58:00.000Z
slug = "pennsylvania-coronavirus-patients-ages-young-people-seniors"
authors = ["Sarah Anne Hughes", "Angela Couloumbis"]
byline = "Sarah Anne Hughes of Spotlight PA and Angela Couloumbis of Spotlight PA"
title = "More than half of all confirmed Pa. coronavirus patients are under 50 years old, new data shows  "
description = "Information provided for the first time Thursday by the state Department of Health shows 12% of patients are between 19 and 24, while another 39% are between 25 and 49."
blurb = "Information provided for the first time Thursday by the state Department of Health shows 12% of patients are between 19 and 24, while another 39% are between 25 and 49."
kicker = "Coronavirus"
suppress-featured = false
topics = ["Coronavirus"]
no-index = false
internal-id = "SPLCASES26"
url = ""
internal-budget = ""
arc-id = "FF253MKKU5HMFHDXGZJPDMNQ7Q"
linktitle = ""
weight = 0
series = []
subtitle = ""
modal-exclude = false
aliases = []
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i><b>Spotlight PA</b></i></a><i> is an independent, nonpartisan newsroom powered by The Philadelphia Inquirer in partnership with the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and PennLive/Patriot-News. </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><i>Sign up for our free weekly newsletter</i></a><i>.</i>

New data from the state shows that more than half of Pennsylvania’s confirmed coronavirus patients are under 50 years old, while seniors make up less than a quarter of cases.

Information provided for the first time Thursday by the state Department of Health shows 12% of patients are between 19 and 24, while another 39% are between 25 and 49.

Seniors aged 65 or older, one of the groups most susceptible to serious complications, make up 18% of cases. Children 18 and under are the smallest group, at roughly 3%.

As of Thursday, there were 1,687 confirmed cases in 48 of Pennsylvania’s 67 counties. 

More than 170 people have required hospitalization, Health Secretary Rachel Levine said Thursday. Of those, 56 have been treated in intensive care units and 32 have required ventilators, which experts expect will be in high demand and short supply as cases swell.

The number of new cases being reported each day is rising exponentially, with 560 additional cases reported between Wednesday and Thursday.

Sixteen people have died statewide. Of those, 68% were people over 65.

At a briefing on March 21, Levine said the state is “still seeing a significant number of young adults — some even in their 20s, 30s, and 40s — that have required hospitalization.”

“So it is very important for younger adults not to be complacent,” she said. “They need to practice social distancing. And again, please stay at home.”

<iframe title="The ages of Pennsylvania's coronavirus patients" aria-label="Interactive pie chart" id="datawrapper-chart-HkN6N" src="//datawrapper.dwcdn.net/HkN6N/2/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="574"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",function(a){if(void 0!==a.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var e in a.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.getElementById("datawrapper-chart-"+e)||document.querySelector("iframe[src*='"+e+"']");t&&(t.style.height=a.data["datawrapper-height"][e]+"px")}})}();
</script>

<i><b>100% ESSENTIAL: </b></i><i>Spotlight PA provides its journalism at no cost to newsrooms across the state as a public good to keep our communities informed and thriving. If you value this service, please give a gift today at </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><i>spotlightpa.org/donate</i></a><i>.</i>

<script src="https://www.spotlightpa.org/embed.js" async></script><div data-spl-embed-version="1" data-spl-src="https://www.spotlightpa.org/embeds/tips/?tip_text=Do%20you%20have%20a%20tip%20about%20%3Cb%3Ehow%20Pa.'s%20government%20is%20responding%20to%20the%20coronavirus%3C%2Fb%3E%3F%20Tell%20us."></div>
