+++
arc-id = "IYAYCDCA55F55EEIW67SKEC4K4"
internal-id = "SPLYELLOW08"
internal-budget = ""
image = "external/0fs7sdy1gvpfp5yd67426yz1s4.jpeg"
image-description = "In March, Gov. Tom Wolf shuttered much of the state’s economy and began ordering residents to stay at home in an effort to mitigate the coronavirus."
image-caption = ""
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-size = ""
published = 2020-05-08T16:36:03Z
slug = "pennsylvania-reopening-pittsburgh-region-counties"
authors = ["Cynthia Fernandez"]
byline = "Cynthia Fernandez of Spotlight PA"
title = "Pa. officials will allow Pittsburgh region to relax coronavirus-related restrictions"
subtitle = ""
description = "Gov. Tom Wolf is expected to announce that Allegheny, Armstrong, Bedford, Blair, Butler, Cambria, Fayette, Fulton, Greene, Indiana, Somerset, Washington, and Westmoreland Counties can begin reopening."
blurb = "Gov. Tom Wolf is expected to announce that Allegheny, Armstrong, Bedford, Blair, Butler, Cambria, Fayette, Fulton, Greene, Indiana, Somerset, Washington, and Westmoreland Counties can begin reopening."
kicker = "Coronavirus"
topics = ["Coronavirus"]
series = ["Top News"]
linktitle = ""
suppress-featured = false
weight = 0
url = ""
aliases = []
modal-exclude = false
no-index = false
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i><b>Spotlight PA</b></i></a><i> is an independent, nonpartisan newsroom powered by The Philadelphia Inquirer in partnership with the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and PennLive/Patriot-News. </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><i>Sign up for our free weekly newsletter</i></a><i>.</i>

HARRISBURG — State officials will allow 13 counties in the Pittsburgh region to ease coronavirus-related restrictions on businesses and residents, a coveted step toward reopening that took effect Friday in much of northwest and north-central Pennsylvania.

Gov. Tom Wolf is expected to announce Friday that Allegheny, Armstrong, Bedford, Blair, Butler, Cambria, Fayette, Fulton, Greene, Indiana, Somerset, Washington, and Westmoreland Counties will be able move into the “yellow phase” of his tiered reopening plan, an administration official said.

It’s unclear when the change will take effect. They will join 24 counties that were previously given the go-ahead to loosen some restrictions.

In March, Wolf shuttered much of the state’s economy and began ordering residents to stay at home in an effort to mitigate the coronavirus. On Thursday, Wolf extended his stay-at-home and business closure orders until June 4 for the rest of the state.

<i>This story will be updated.</i>



















<i>Spotlight PA receives funding from nonprofit institutions and readers like you who are committed to investigative journalism that gets results. Give a gift today at </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><i>spotlightpa.org/donate</i></a><i>.</i>
