+++
arc-id = "L24YUZVEQJHZHAGADRY24R4DM4"
blurb = "Spotlight PA held a free panel on Pa.'s multibillion-dollar budget and how it will impact residents."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Spotlight PA held a free panel on Pa.'s multibillion-dollar budget and how it will impact residents."
draft = false
event-date = 2022-07-26T18:00:00-04:00
feed-exclude = false
image = "external/kaggf8qaa3xgbgvw8yrbjax4eg.jpeg"
image-credit = "TIM TAI / Philadelphia Inquirer"
image-description = "The budget lays out the state’s plans and priorities for the immediate fiscal year and years to come."
internal-budget = "Join Spotlight July 26 for a free breakdown of Pa.'s multibillion-dollar budget and how it will impact you."
internal-id = "SPLBUDGET726"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
no-index = false
pinned = false
published = 2022-07-19T11:00:00-04:00
slug = "pennsylvania-budget-2022-breakdown-event"
suppress-date = false
title = "WATCH: A free virtual panel on the new Pa. budget and what it prioritizes"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><i>Spotlight PA</i></a><i> is an independent, nonpartisan newsroom powered by The Philadelphia Inquirer in partnership with PennLive/The Patriot-News, TribLIVE/Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, and WITF Public Media. </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><i>Sign up for our free newsletters</i></a><i>.</i>

A week after their June 30 deadline, Pennsylvania lawmakers approved a new state budget. The $45 billion spending plan, which was signed into law by Gov. Tom Wolf, created a child care tax rebate program, boosted education funding, and funded new housing and environmental projects, among other provisions.

Education, which Wolf cited as one of his top priorities, received a major boost with $525 million allocated to K-12 schools. Over $2 billion in remaining stimulus dollars were also distributed to one-off conservation, water infrastructure, and public safety projects. The legislature also used some of this money to create a $125 million home repair program aimed at low-income homeowners and landlords who own less than 15 rental units.

The budget lays out the state’s plans and priorities for the immediate fiscal year and years to come. These expenditures will sustain, expand, and modify a wide range of state programs and policies that affect everyone in Pennsylvania.

On July 26, Spotlight PA held a discussion on the multibillion-dollar budget and how it will impact residents. Watch it below.

Our panelists were:

- <b>Stephen Caruso</b>, capitol reporter at Spotlight PA

- <b>Phyllis Chamberlain</b>, executive director of the Housing Alliance of Pennsylvania

- <b>Myron Arnowitt</b>, Pennsylvania director of Clean Water Action

- <b>Jonathan Berger</b>, senior director of government affairs for the Pennsylvania School Boards Association

{{<youtube v11JtXTO78Y>}}

<i><b>» Spotlight PA’s events operate on a “pay-what-you-can” honor system</b></i><i>. If you value this public-service event, pay it forward and contribute any amount to Spotlight PA now so we can keep our programming free for everyone: </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><i>spotlightpa.org/donate</i></a><i>.</i>
