+++
blurb = "Join Spotlight PA on Oct. 12 to learn more about the candidates running for state Supreme Court and more, and what these elections will mean for you."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Join Spotlight PA on Oct. 12 to learn more about the candidates running for state Supreme Court and more, and what these elections will mean for you."
event-date = 2023-10-12T18:00:00-04:00
event-title = "COURT PRIMER"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_YOXkhwI5SHSHQCCoc-OJNA"
image = "external/7760aqj3vp65p3jpzm9cn7ts2w.jpeg"
image-credit = "Kent M. Wilhelm / For Spotlight PA"
image-description = "The exterior to the Pennsylvania Judicial Center, located in Harrisburg’s historic capitol complex."
internal-id = "SPLCOURTS1012"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
published = 2023-09-14T12:42:48.11-04:00
slug = "pennsylvania-election-2023-supreme-commonwealth-superior-event"
suppress-date = false
title = "You’re invited! A free panel on Pa.’s 2023 Supreme Court, judicial candidates"
title-tag = "Learn more about PA’s 2023 Supreme Court candidates"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><em>Spotlight PA</em></a><em> is an independent, nonpartisan, and nonprofit newsroom producing investigative and public-service journalism that holds the powerful to account and drives positive change in Pennsylvania. </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><em>Sign up for our free newsletters</em></a><em>.</em>

This November, Pennsylvania voters will select a new state Supreme Court justice and new judges to sit on Commonwealth and Superior Courts. They will also decide whether two judges on Superior Court get another term. The winning candidates will have considerable power over the interpretation of state laws and weigh in on consequential issues such as election administration and abortion.

To help you cast an informed vote, Spotlight PA is hosting a free panel on the candidates’ backgrounds and records and how their terms would impact state law.

Join Spotlight PA’s government reporters Kate Huangpu and Stephen Caruso Thursday, Oct. 12 from 6-7 p.m. ET on Zoom for a free panel on Pa.’s court candidates.<strong></strong>

<strong>RSVP for free </strong><a href="https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_YOXkhwI5SHSHQCCoc-OJNA"><strong>here</strong></a><strong>. Submit your questions in advance to </strong><a href="mailto:events@spotlightpa.org"><strong>events@spotlightpa.org</strong></a>.

<strong><em>» Spotlight PA’s events operate on a “pay-what-you-can” honor system.</em></strong><em> If you value this public-service event, pay it forward and contribute any amount to Spotlight PA now so we can keep our programming free for everyone: </em><a href="http://spotlightpa.org/donate"><em>spotlightpa.org/donate</em></a><em>.</em>

