+++
arc-id = "FYXU7TW7SNDX5AS22M3WT6RWUA"
blurb = "For the first time ever, Spotlight PA is participating in Centre Gives, a 36-hour online giving event in Centre County hosted by Centre Foundation."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "The clock is ticking to support Spotlight PA during Centre Gives 2023 and power vital investigative and accountability journalism in Centre County"
extended-kicker = "Centre Gives"
image = "2023/05/01j5-mxy8-s7py-wv64.jpeg"
image-credit = "Abby Drey / Centre Daily Times"
image-description = "Spring Creek flows through Talleyrand Park in Bellefonte, Centre County, the site of the 2023 Centre Gives Fest."
internal-budget = "For Spotlight PA only."
internal-id = "SPLCGXX"
kicker = "Editor's Notes"
modal-exclude = false
published = 2023-05-09T23:59:33-04:00
slug = "centre-gives-2023-spotlight-pa-news-centre-foundation"
suppress-date = false
title = "Centre Gives 2023: How to support Spotlight PA’s trusted, reliable journalism"
title-tag = "Support Spotlight PA during Centre Gives 2023"
topics = ["Editor's Notes"]
+++

For the first time ever, Spotlight PA is participating in Centre Gives, a 36-hour online giving event for nonprofits in Centre County. Your support will directly power the work of our regional reporting bureau based in State College.

<b>» You can donate to Spotlight PA through Centre Gives at </b><a href="https://centregives.org/organizations/273-spotlight-pa"><b>centregives.org/organizations/273-spotlight-pa</b></a>

Here’s what you need to know:

## What is Centre Gives 2023?

An online giving event designed to encourage community giving to nonprofits in Centre County, including Spotlight PA.

## When is Centre Gives 2023?

Hosted by Centre Foundation, the fundraiser will start May 10 at 8 a.m. and run until May 11 at 8 p.m. You can support Spotlight PA <a href="http://centregives.org/organizations/273-spotlight-pa">via the Centre Gives website</a> any time during the event.

## Why support Spotlight PA during Centre Gives?

The more Spotlight PA can raise during Centre Gives, the greater the portion of “stretch” dollars it will receive from pooled funds by Centre Foundation and Hamer Foundation.

## What will my Centre Gives 2023 donation to Spotlight PA support?

Spotlight PA, a nonprofit, nonpartisan newsroom, is one of more than 200 organizations participating this year.

All donations to Spotlight PA through Centre Gives will support Spotlight PA’s regional bureau based in State College, which launched last year. Spotlight PA State College is producing high-impact accountability and public-service journalism, available at no cost at <a href="http://spotlightpa.org/statecollege">spotlightpa.org/statecollege</a> and distributed to more than 90 news organizations across Pennsylvania, including the Centre Daily Times, WPSU, and <a href="http://StateCollege.com" target="_blank">StateCollege.com</a>.

Spotlight PA State College is reporting on Penn State, challenges facing rural communities, and local accountability issues like how our tax dollars are spent and how our towns are run.

## How can I support Spotlight PA during Centre Gives?

You can donate to Spotlight PA through Centre Gives at <a href="https://centregives.org/organizations/273-spotlight-pa">centregives.org/organizations/273-spotlight-pa</a>.

You can also contribute by phone: Call Centre Foundation between the hours of 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. on May 10-11 to make a credit or debit card donation. The number is (814) 237-6229.

Centre Gives does not accept cash or check payments.

## Is my Centre Gives support tax-deductible?

Yes, all Centre Gives gifts are tax-deductible.

<i>Spotlight PA is funded by</i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support"><i> foundations</i></a><i> </i><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support"><i>and readers like you</i></a><i> who are committed to accountability journalism that gets results.</i>
