+++
authors = ["Associated Press"]
blurb = "RFK Jr. isn’t formally ending his presidential bid, but he is seeking to get off of Pennsylvania’s ballot to assist Donald Trump."
byline = "Associated Press"
description = "RFK Jr. isn’t formally ending his presidential bid, but he is seeking to get off of Pennsylvania’s ballot to assist Donald Trump."
feed-exclude = false
image = "2024/08/01kb-w747-c829-3vga.jpeg"
image-credit = "Greg Allen / Invision / AP File"
image-description = "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. attends the 2019 Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Ripple of Hope Awards at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York."
internal-id = "APRFKOUT"
kicker = "Elections"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "RFK Jr. asks to withdraw from Pennsylvania ballot"
pinned = false
published = 2024-08-23T15:41:59.21-04:00
slug = "robert-f-kennedy-jr-pennsylvania-ballot-withdraw-donald-trump"
suppress-date = false
title = "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. asks to withdraw from Pennsylvania ballot, backs Donald Trump"
title-tag = "RFK Jr. asks to withdraw from Pennsylvania ballot"
topics = ["Elections"]
twitter-title = "RFK Jr. asks to withdraw from Pennsylvania ballot"
+++

PHOENIX — Robert F. Kennedy said Friday he is suspending his independent presidential bid and is backing Donald Trump.

Kennedy said his internal polls had showed that his presence in the race would hurt Trump and help Democratic nominee Kamala Harris. He cited free speech, the war in Ukraine, and &#34;a war on our children&#34; as among the reasons to try to remove his name from the ballot in battleground states.

&#34;These are the principal causes that persuaded me to leave the Democratic Party and run as an independent and now to throw my support to President Trump,&#34; Kennedy said.

However, he made clear that he wasn&#39;t formally ending his bid and said his supporters could continue to back him in the majority of states where they are unlikely to sway the outcome. Kennedy took steps to withdraw his candidacy in at least two states late this week, Arizona and Pennsylvania.

Kennedy said the move followed conversations with Trump over the past few weeks.

Before the speech, his campaign had said in a Pennsylvania court filing Friday that he would be endorsing Trump for president. A spokesperson for Kennedy said the court filing had been made in error and would be updated, though Kennedy himself reiterated his support for Trump shortly afterward.

The Pennsylvania filing came Friday in a case in which Kennedy was <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2024/08/robert-f-kennedy-pennsylvania-president-ballot-third-party-candidates/">defending his paperwork to get on the ballot</a> in the battleground state against a challenge by two Democratic activists.

The filing said that, &#34;as a result of today&#39;s endorsement of Donald Trump&#34; he was requesting the dismissal of his campaign&#39;s nomination papers so that he would not appear on Pennsylvania&#39;s ballot.

Kennedy already has secured ballot access in several states, including battlegrounds like Michigan and Nevada. Some secretaries of state said it&#39;s too late for him to remove himself even if he wants to do so.

Cheri Hardmon, a spokesperson for Michigan&#39;s Department of State, said its law requires presidential electors be selected at the fall state convention, and that already happened, which means his name will remain on the state&#39;s ballot.

And in Wisconsin, where Kennedy has filed for ballot access and is awaiting approval, there is &#34;no mechanism for him to &#39;take back&#39; the filing,&#34; according to Wisconsin Elections Commission spokesperson Joel DeSpain.

<strong><em>BEFORE YOU GO…</em></strong><em> If you learned something from this article, pay it forward and contribute to Spotlight PA at </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><em>spotlightpa.org/donate</em></a><em>. Spotlight PA is funded by</em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support"><em> foundations and readers like you</em></a><em> who are committed to accountability journalism that gets results.</em>

