+++
blurb = "Rather than make you wait until next week, we’re providing answers to the Thanksgiving Day Scramblers, Riddlers, and trivia from our newsletters here."
byline = "Spotlight PA staff"
description = "Rather than make you wait until next week, we’re providing answers to the Thanksgiving Day Scramblers, Riddlers, and trivia from our newsletters here."
feed-exclude = false
image = "2023/10/01jm-02nt-77sz-7w6f.jpeg"
image-credit = "Colin Deppen / Spotlight PA"
image-description = "A wooded area near the border between Elk and Cameron Counties."
internal-id = "SPLPUZZLES24"
kicker = "Puzzles"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2024-11-28T06:00:00-05:00
slug = "thanksgiving-day-2024-scrambler-riddler-trivia-answers-pennsylvania"
suppress-date = false
title = "Answers to Spotlight PA’s 2024 Thanksgiving Day Scrambler, Riddler, and trivia puzzles"
title-tag = "Answers to Spotlight PA’s 2024 Thanksgiving Day puzzles"
+++

Rather than making you wait until next week, we’re providing answers to the Thanksgiving Day Scramblers, Riddlers, and PA Local trivia here. You’ll find the clues recapped up top and the answers below. We hope you have a great holiday, and we’ll get back to the news next week.

If you feel thankful for Spotlight PA’s fearless, independent journalism, <a href="https://spotlightpa.donorsupport.co/page/donate-onetime?utm_campaign=Thanksgiving%20Scrambler%20-%20PA%20Post%2011%2028%2024&amp;utm_source=ActiveCampaign&amp;utm_medium=email&amp;utm_content=A%20special%20Thanksgiving%20Scrambler%20edition">become a member now</a>.

SCRAMBLER CLUES

1. G S I U N I N D E O

2. D E S T A R U A T​

3. H M D E A E O M​

4. V I T I F E S T I S E

5. L A F I A M L I​

RIDDLER CLUES

Case No. 284: What has ears but cannot hear?

Case No. 285: What has a glint in its eye but cannot see?

Case No. 286: What kind of building can have many stories but still be just 15 feet tall?

Case No. 287: What is at the center of every problem?

Case No. 288: What truck has wheels and also flies?

TRIVIA CLUES

1. What’s Pennsylvania’s busiest state park?

2. Which famous American expat painter was born in the city of Allegheny, which is now part of Pittsburgh?

3. Which Pennsylvania county was the most recently formed?

4. The word “Schuylkill” means “hidden river” in what language?

5. Latrobe lays claim to the invention of which iconic dessert?

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

SCRAMBLER ANSWERS

1. INDIGENOUS

2. SATURATED

3. HOMEMADE

4. FESTIVITIES

5. FAMILIAL

RIDDLER ANSWERS

Case No. 284: Cornstalks

Case No. 285: A needle

Case No. 286: A library

Case No. 287: The letter “B”

Case No. 288: A garbage truck

TRIVIA ANSWERS

1. Presque Isle State Park in Erie

2. Mary Cassatt

3. Lackawanna County, in 1878

4. Dutch

5. The banana split, although its origins <a href="https://www.tastingtable.com/981033/the-debated-origin-of-the-banana-split/">are apparently debatable</a>.

