+++
blurb = "Join Spotlight PA on July 9 for a live virtual interview with Elizabeth Currid-Halkett, author of “The Overlooked Americans.”"
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Join Spotlight PA on July 9 for a live interview with Elizabeth Currid-Halkett, author of “The Overlooked Americans,” a call to bridge our geographic divides."
event-date = 2024-07-09T18:00:00-04:00
event-title = "Is the urban-rural divide in Pennsylvania vastly overstated?"
event-url = "/donate/"
extended-kicker = "Member Perks"
image = "2024/01/01jt-002d-hhq3-7b79.jpeg"
image-credit = "Georgianna Sutherland / For Spotlight PA"
image-description = "A view of Hollidaysburg in Blair County, Pennsylvania."
internal-id = "SPLHALKETT0724"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2024-07-01T12:04:47.421-04:00
slug = "spotlight-pennsylvania-rural-affairs-currid-halkett-event"
suppress-date = false
title = "The urban-rural divide in Pa. and beyond is vastly overstated — and doing real harm, new book says"
title-tag = "Is the urban-rural divide in Pennsylvania vastly overstated?"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

The urban-rural divide in Pennsylvania and across the United States is vastly overstated and not supported by the values and experiences of people who live in both places, according to a new book.

Join Spotlight PA on Tuesday, July 9 from 6-7 p.m. ET for a live one-on-one interview with Elizabeth Currid-Halkett, author of “The Overlooked Americans,” an appeal for people to reconnect across geographic lines.

<strong>This is a member-only event, but anyone can </strong><a href="/donate/"><strong>attend by becoming a Spotlight PA member right now at this link</strong></a>. Your gift will automatically register you for the event, and you will receive a follow-up email with details and the link.

<strong>Current members can </strong><a href="mailto:membership@spotlightpa.org"><strong>send an email to RSVP for free</strong></a><strong>.</strong>

Raised in Danville and an alumna of Carnegie Mellon University, Currid-Halkett argues the struggle of Appalachia has been wrongly applied to everyone in America’s heartland, when in fact many areas are thriving. The idea of rural crisis, she says, is fueled by academics, politicians, and the media.

The discussion will be moderated by Spotlight PA CEO &amp; President Christopher Baxter. Spotlight PA members support some of the most impactful journalism in Pennsylvania and also receive exclusive perks, including member-only events like this one.

Sponsorships for this event are available, and those interested should <a href="mailto:membership@spotlightpa.org">contact Spotlight PA’s membership department.</a><strong><em></em></strong>

<strong><em>BEFORE YOU GO…</em></strong><em> If you learned something from this article, pay it forward and contribute to Spotlight PA at </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><em>spotlightpa.org/donate</em></a><em>. Spotlight PA is funded by</em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support"><em> foundations and readers like you</em></a><em> who are committed to accountability journalism that gets results.</em>
