+++
blurb = "Join Spotlight PA on Oct. 3 for a live panel about Pa.’s major party row office candidates and the ways their plans would impact you."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Join us Oct. 3 to discuss Pennsylvania’s 2024 candidates for the three row offices: attorney general, auditor general, and treasurer."
event-date = 2024-10-03T18:00:00-04:00
event-title = "ELECTION 2024: What to know about Pa.’s row office candidates"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_vcjU4hM0TBSOlZeV_yK4fw"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2024/09/01ke-91sn-qztx-607n.png"
internal-id = "SPLROWEVENT1003"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "Event: What you need to know about Pa.’s row office candidates."
pinned = false
published = 2024-09-13T14:54:58.051-04:00
slug = "pennsylvania-row-office-election-candidates-2024-attorney-general-auditor-treasurer"
suppress-date = false
title = "Spotlight PA Event: What you need to know about Pa.’s attorney general, auditor general, and treasurer candidates"
title-tag = "Event: What to know about Pa.’s row office candidates."
topics = ["Events"]
twitter-title = "Event: What you need to know about Pa.’s row office candidates."
+++

On Nov. 5, Pennsylvania voters will choose their next attorney general, auditor general, and treasurer. These row office positions come with considerable power over the state’s finances, the enforcement of its laws, and how it monitors for waste and fraud.

Democrat Erin McClelland will face off against Republican incumbent Stacy Garrity for treasurer. Philadelphia State Representative Malcolm Kenyatta is up against sitting Republican Tim DeFoor for auditor general. And Democrat Eugene DePasquale is competing with Republican Dave Sunday in the open race for attorney general.

Join reporter Stephen Caruso and Chris Borick, pollster and political science professor at Muhlenberg College, on <strong>Thursday, Oct. 3, from 6-7 p.m.</strong> on Zoom for a live webinar covering everything you need to know about these candidates’ histories and campaign pledges, and the offices they hope to win.

<strong>RSVP for free </strong><a href="https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_vcjU4hM0TBSOlZeV_yK4fw"><strong>here</strong></a><strong>. Submit your questions in advance below or send them to </strong><a href="mailto:events@spotlightpa.org"><strong>events@spotlightpa.org</strong></a>.

{{<embed/raw srcdoc="&lt;iframe src=&#34;https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfVCRWFVFzg7ji2eUSSHXB4xvZ4HpGAlyq8Nku-JM6ouW7onA/viewform?embedded=true&#34; width=&#34;640&#34; height=&#34;1401&#34; frameborder=&#34;0&#34; marginheight=&#34;0&#34; marginwidth=&#34;0&#34;&gt;Loading…&lt;/iframe&gt;">}}

<strong><em>» Spotlight PA’s events operate on a “pay-what-you-can” honor system.</em></strong><em> If you value this public-service event, pay it forward and contribute any amount to Spotlight PA now so we can keep our programming free for everyone: </em><a href="http://spotlightpa.org/donate"><em>spotlightpa.org/donate</em></a><em>.</em>

