+++
blurb = "The entire Pennsylvania House of Representatives will be up for a vote this November, as will 25 seats in the state Senate. See all of the candidates."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "This November, all Pennsylvania House of Representatives seats and 25 Senate seats are on the ballot. Find out who’s running in your district."
feed-exclude = false
image = "2023/08/01jd-ah7j-b889-00e9.jpeg"
image-credit = "Amanda Berg / For Spotlight PA"
image-description = "The exterior of the Pennsylvania Capitol in Harrisburg."
internal-id = "SPLLEGCAND24"
kicker = "Elections"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "A full list of PA House and Senate candidates"
pinned = false
published = 2024-10-01T16:21:58.163-04:00
slug = "pennsylvania-election-2024-house-senate-full-list-candidates"
suppress-date = false
title = "Every candidate running for the Pennsylvania legislature in the 2024 general election (full list)"
title-tag = "Pennsylvania House and Senate races: Who's on your ballot?"
topics = ["Elections"]
twitter-title = "A full list of PA House and Senate candidates"
+++

HARRISBURG — The entire Pennsylvania House of Representatives will be up for a vote this November, as will 25 seats in the state Senate.

On the state House side, 110 races are contested. On the state Senate side, 17 are contested.

{{<toc>}}

### Skip to section

- <a href="#spl-heading-1">Search your address to see the races on your ballot</a>

- <a href="#spl-heading-2">See a full list of candidates for the Pennsylvania state House of Representatives</a>

- <a href="#spl-heading-3">See a full list of candidates for the Pennsylvania state Senate</a>

{{</toc>}}

<h2 id="spl-heading-1">Search your address to see the races on your ballot</h2>

Enter your address into Spotlight PA’s sample ballot to get a customized list of candidates.

{{<embed/raw srcdoc="&lt;script src=&#34;https://viz-sample-ballot-2024.data.spotlightpa.org/embed.js&#34; defer&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&lt;div data-spl-interactive=&#34;viz-redistricting-2020&#34;&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;small&gt;&lt;a href=&#34;https://viz-sample-ballot-2024.data.spotlightpa.org&#34;&gt;Click here if you have trouble loading your sample ballot&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/small&gt;">}}

<h2 id="spl-heading-2">See a full list of candidates for the Pennsylvania state House of Representatives</h2>

This November, all 203 seats in the Pennsylvania House of Representatives are on the ballot. Here’s a list of state House candidates:

{{<flourish src="visualisation/19433958" >}}

<h2 id="spl-heading-3">See a full list of candidates for the Pennsylvania state Senate</h2>

This November, 25 of the 50 seats in the Pennsylvania Senate are on the ballot. Here’s a list of state Senate candidates:

{{<flourish src="visualisation/19630632" >}}

<strong><em>BEFORE YOU GO…</em></strong><em> If you learned something from this article, pay it forward and contribute to Spotlight PA at </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/donate"><em>spotlightpa.org/donate</em></a><em>. Spotlight PA is funded by</em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support"><em> foundations and readers like you</em></a><em> who are committed to accountability journalism that gets results.</em>

