+++
app-image = "2025/09/01md-8gkr-ga3w-qs71.png"
app-image-credit = "Provided"
app-image-description = "Cover of Saturnalia, a novel by Stephanie Feldman"
app-image-gravity = "we"
authors = ["Yaasmeen Piper"]
blurb = "As part of Spotlight PA’s new book club, read the hit novel, connect with readers across the state, and join a live discussion on Oct. 23 with the author."
byline = "Yaasmeen Piper of Spotlight PA"
description = "Author Stephanie Feldman joins us on Oct. 23 for a live, virtual discussion."
draft = false
event-date = 2025-10-23T18:00:00-04:00
event-title = "Saturnalia"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_mmNE8HK7Rfuk4Y6cExT_JQ#/registration"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/09/01md-8gkr-ga3w-qs71.png"
image-caption = "Cover of Saturnalia, a novel by Stephanie Feldman"
image-credit = "Provided"
internal-id = "SPLFELDMAN0925"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-09-25T13:27:58.997-04:00
slug = "stephanie-feldman-book-club-saturnalia-philadelphia-pennsylvania-events"
suppress-date = false
title = "Booklight PA: Dive into the world of ‘Saturnalia’ and discuss it with author Stephanie Feldman"
title-tag = "Ask Stephanie Feldman about her hit novel ‘Saturnalia’"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

It’s been three years since Nina walked away from Philadelphia’s elite Saturn Club, abandoning her closest friends and a chance to climb the social ladder. The return of the Saturnalia — a large carnival created to honor the historic city — allows locals to focus on celebration rather than the collapse of their economy and increasingly extreme weather.

But when a well-connected club member, and Nina’s last remaining friend, asks her for a mysterious favor, it plunges her back into the dark society and horrifying secrets.

As part of Spotlight PA’s new book club, Booklight PA, we’re reading Feldman’s science fiction novel and discussing it with readers across the state on Discord. (<a href="https://discord.gg/RJJm3BxnwB"><strong>Join now!</strong></a>) On Oct. 23, Feldman joins us live to answer your questions about the novel.

Best-selling author Carmen Maria Machado of <em>In the Dream House</em>, and <em>Her Body and Other Parties</em> called <em>Saturnalia</em> “an eerie, propulsive novel.” It was lauded in The Guardian’s “best recent science fiction, fantasy, and horror” roundup, and named one of 2022’s best fantasy novels by Vulture.

This event is in partnership with A Novel Idea, a community-minded bookstore and event space based in East Passyunk, Philadelphia, run by Alexander Schneider and Christina Rosso-Schneider. Read more about A Novel Idea and <a href="https://anovelideaphilly.com/order/"><strong>purchase your books here</strong></a><strong>.</strong>

Register and submit your questions for Feldman <a href="https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_mmNE8HK7Rfuk4Y6cExT_JQ#/registration"><strong>here</strong></a>. And <a href="https://discord.gg/RJJm3BxnwB"><strong>join our Discord group chat</strong></a> to discuss the book as you go.

<strong>OTHER BOOKLIGHT PA EVENTS:</strong>

<strong>Sept. 25: </strong><em>The School for Good Mothers, </em>Jessamine Chan. <a href="https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_pxh0caSrSJORWGXblaAx5w">Register here.</a>

<strong>Nov. 18</strong>: <em>If Sons, Then Heirs,</em> Lorene Cary

