+++
app-image = "2025/10/01me-wrg7-9kgv-ph9y.jpeg"
app-image-credit = "Matt Slocum / AP"
app-image-description = "Cody Balmer, accused of setting a fire at Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro's official residence, leaves Dauphin County Courthouse on Tuesday, Oct. 14, 2025 in Harrisburg, Pa."
authors = ["Associated Press"]
blurb = "Cody Balmer pled guilty to arson, attempted murder, and other charges for his April attack on the governor’s mansion, which endangered Gov. Josh Shapiro and his family while they slept."
byline = "Associated Press"
description = "Cody Balmer pled guilty to arson, attempted murder, and other charges for his April attack on the governor’s mansion, which endangered Gov. Josh Shapiro."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/10/01me-wrg7-9kgv-ph9y.jpeg"
image-caption = "Cody Balmer leaves Dauphin County Courthouse."
image-credit = "Matt Slocum / AP"
image-description = "Cody Balmer, accused of setting a fire at Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro's official residence, leaves Dauphin County Courthouse on Tuesday, Oct. 14, 2025 in Harrisburg, Pa."
internal-id = "APBALMER1025"
kicker = "Josh Shapiro"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-10-14T10:49:33.605-04:00
slug = "arson-cody-balmer-plea-sentence-josh-shapiro"
suppress-date = false
title = "Cody Balmer pleads guilty to arson attack at Pa. governor’s mansion while Shapiros slept"
title-tag = "Arsonist behind fire at PA governor’s residence pleads guilty"
topics = ["Josh Shapiro"]
+++

HARRISBURG — A man who scaled an iron security fence in the middle of the night, eluded police, and used beer bottles filled with gasoline to ignite the occupied Pennsylvania governor’s mansion pleaded guilty Tuesday to attempted murder and other charges.

Cody Balmer, 38, also entered pleas to terrorism, 22 counts of arson, aggravated arson, burglary, aggravated assault of Gov. Josh Shapiro, 21 counts of reckless endangerment, and loitering in the April 13 attack that did millions of dollars in damage to the state-owned brick building.

Under a plea deal, Balmer was sentenced to 25 to 50 years in prison.

Shapiro and members of his family had to be awakened and evacuated, but no one was injured. The multiple arson and endangerment charges reflected the number of people in the residence at the time, including the governor’s family, guests, and state troopers.

The fire was set hours after they celebrated the Jewish holiday of Passover with a Seder in the residence. Prosecutors played video clips that showed Molotov cocktails going off and a figure inside and outside the residence. Judge Deborah Curcillo called the video “horrific” and “very frightening.”

Balmer told police he planned to beat Shapiro with a small sledgehammer if he had encountered him after breaking into the building, according to court documents. Balmer turned himself in the next afternoon to face charges of attempted homicide, terrorism, aggravated arson, and aggravated assault.

Police say Balmer broke in through the southern wing of the residence, into a room often used to entertain crowds and display art. Investigators recovered two broken glass beer bottles containing gasoline. The fire charred walls, tables, buffet serving dishes, plates, and a piano. Window panes and brick around doors and windows were also damaged.

Shapiro&#39;s Jewish faith and the attack during the Passover weekend raised questions about Balmer&#39;s motivation, but Balmer told the Associated Press in a May letter from jail that had not been a factor in his decision.

“He can be Jewish, Muslim, or a purple people eater for all I care and as long as he leaves me and mine alone,” Balmer wrote.

He said in a brief June 9 video interview from Camp Hill State Prison that he did think beforehand about whether children might be injured.

“Does anyone ever consider children?” Balmer said in June. “It doesn&#39;t seem that way. I sure as hell did. I&#39;m glad no one got hurt.” Asked why he felt Shapiro had somehow done him wrong, Balmer replied: “I&#39;m not going to answer that.”

Balmer’s mother said days after his arrest that she had tried to get him assistance for mental health issues, but “nobody would help.” Court proceedings had been delayed while he received mental health treatment, his lawyer has said.

At a court hearing a few days after the fire, Balmer told a judge he was an unemployed welder with no income or savings and “a lot of children.”

The residence, built in 1968, did not have sprinklers. Work to fix the damage and to bolster its security features continues.

