+++
app-image = "2025/10/01me-jt33-zbyc-28j5.png"
blurb = "Join Spotlight PA at 6 p.m. Oct. 28 for a live conversation with Michael Berry, one of the nation’s leading First Amendment attorneys."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Join Spotlight PA at 6 p.m. Oct. 28 for a live conversation with Michael Berry, one of the nation’s leading First Amendment attorneys."
draft = false
event-date = 2025-10-10T16:15:00-04:00
event-title = "Protecting the First"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/10/01me-jqr7-z35a-4wen.png"
image-description = "A live conversation with Michael Berry, one of the nation’s leading First Amendment attorneys."
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "SPLFIRSTEV1025"
kicker = "EVENTS"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-10-13T05:00:00-04:00
slug = "free-press-first-amendment-lawsuits-media-law-cases-events"
suppress-date = false
title = "The growing legal threats to press freedom and what it means for local news"
title-tag = "Top lawyer talks growing threats to press freedom"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

The legal threats to press freedom in the United States are on the rise at a time when many local news organizations are already under immense financial pressure, making in-depth investigative and accountability reporting riskier than ever.

Join Spotlight PA on Tuesday, Oct. 28, at 6 p.m. for a live one-on-one interview with Michael Berry, a partner at Ballard Spahr in Philadelphia and one of the nation’s leading First Amendment attorneys.

Hear about the changing legal landscape facing news organizations like Spotlight PA, how adversaries are using the courts to put the financial squeeze on newsrooms, and details about Berry’s most interesting cases from recent years.

This event is free for Spotlight PA members. If you are not yet a member and want to join, <a href="https://spotlightpa.donorsupport.co/page/donate-onetime?utm_campaign=berry_event_registration">make a gift of any amount now</a> and you’ll be automatically registered for the event. Following your gift, you will receive details and the link.

<a href="#XDJJAJPR" style="display: flex; justify-content: center;"></a>

Current members can <a href="mailto:membership@spotlightpa.org">send an email to RSVP for free.</a>

For over 20 years, Berry has represented news, entertainment, and other media clients in defamation and privacy suits, fought for the right of the press and public to access government and court records, defended reporters who are subpoenaed, and advised clients on newsgathering and other First Amendment matters. He is a trial lawyer who regularly defends media companies in federal and state courts throughout the country. For example, Michael has served as trial counsel for prominent newspapers and websites and succeeded in unsealing records in high-profile criminal prosecutions and high-stakes corporate litigation.

In light of his accomplishments, The Best Lawyers in America named Michael its First Amendment Law Lawyer of the Year in Philadelphia for 2018, 2020, and 2023, its Media Lawyer of the Year in Philadelphia for 2019, and most recently its 2022 Lawyer of the Year in Philadelphia for First Amendment Litigation. In 2020, The Legal Intelligencer named him as a “Power Player,” which recognizes attorneys who through their advocacy made a significant impact on public policy, legislation, or jurisprudence in Pennsylvania.

The discussion will be moderated by Spotlight PA CEO &amp; President Christopher Baxter. Spotlight PA members support some of the most impactful journalism in Pennsylvania and also receive exclusive perks, including member-only events like this one.

Join the movement and support vital journalism that gets results by <a href="https://spotlightpa.donorsupport.co/page/donate-onetime?utm_campaign=berry_event_registration">becoming a member now</a>.<strong></strong>
