+++
app-image = "2025/05/01m2-zrzp-sfta-qmp4.jpeg"
app-image-description = "A live virtual discussion with Mary France, retired federal bankruptcy judge, Middle District of Pennsylvania."
app-image-gravity = "ce"
blurb = "Join Spotlight PA at 6 p.m. June 3 for a live virtual interview with Mary France, a retired federal bankruptcy judge and former Assistant U.S. Trustee in Pennsylvania."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Join Spotlight PA on June 3 for a live virtual interview with Mary France, a retired federal bankruptcy judge and former Assistant U.S. Trustee, on how the federal courts work."
event-date = 2025-06-03T18:00:00-04:00
event-title = "Full Court Press"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_F1jZYgX3Qz-UNyTtKXOf8w#/registration"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/05/01m2-zrqw-2bb7-c9f0.png"
image-description = "A live virtual discussion with Mary France, retired federal bankruptcy judge, Middle District of Pennsylvania."
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "SPLCOURTEV0525"
kicker = "EVENTS"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-05-22T22:55:23.923-04:00
slug = "federal-courts-trump-injunction-ruling-pennsylvania"
suppress-date = false
title = "How the federal courts work, and why their independence is paramount"
title-tag = "A retired judge talks federal courts under pressure"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

Federal judges have been thrust into the center of our nation’s politics as courts across the country are flooded with challenges to changes by President Donald Trump’s administration, and as some Republicans have advocated for defying rulings, or impeachment.

At the same time, the attention has sparked debate over whether federal judges should have the power to issue nationwide injunctions over executive branch policies.

And yet, most people don’t fully understand how our federal court system works, the nuances of how it’s run, and why its independence is in everyone’s interest.

Join Spotlight PA on Tuesday, June 3, at 6 p.m. for a live one-on-one interview with Mary France, a retired federal bankruptcy judge in Pennsylvania and former Assistant U.S. Trustee. She’ll talk about how the federal courts work and answer your questions about the system.

This is a member-only event, but you can attend by <a href="https://spotlightpa.donorsupport.co/page/donate-onetime?utm_campaign=france_event_registration">becoming a Spotlight PA member right now at this link</a>. Your gift will automatically register you for the event, and you will receive a follow-up email with details and the link. Current members can <a href="mailto:membership@spotlightpa.org">send an email to RSVP for free.</a>

France, who currently resides in Central Pennsylvania, received her law degree from Dickinson School of Law of the Pennsylvania State University. She was a federal bankruptcy judge for the United States bankruptcy court, Middle District of Pennsylvania, from 2003 to 2017. In addition, France served as the Assistant U.S. Trustee in the Middle District. In that role, she lectured frequently on the role of the U.S. Trustee in the administration of bankruptcy cases.

The discussion will be moderated by Spotlight PA CEO &amp; President Christopher Baxter. Spotlight PA members support some of the most impactful journalism in Pennsylvania and also receive exclusive perks, including member-only events like this one.

Join the movement and support vital journalism that gets results by <a href="https://spotlightpa.donorsupport.co/page/donate-onetime?utm_campaign=france_event_registration">becoming a member now</a>.<strong></strong>

