+++
authors = ["Ann Rejrat"]
blurb = "Volunteers who spoke to Spotlight PA  described Field of Screams as a hostile environment."
byline = "Ann Rejrat for Spotlight PA"
description = "Volunteers who spoke to Spotlight PA  described Field of Screams as a hostile environment."
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/06/01m4-1krh-j329-b2qw.png"
image-credit = "Robert Devonshire Jr. / LNP Correspondent"
image-description = "A photo of the entrance to Field of Screams in Mountville, Lancaster County, from the 2020 season."
image-gravity = "we"
internal-id = "SPLFOSBTR0625"
kicker = "Public Safety"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "How Spotlight PA reported its Field of Screams investigation"
pinned = false
published = 2025-06-16T02:00:00-04:00
slug = "field-of-screams-how-we-reported"
suppress-date = false
title = "How Spotlight PA reported its Field of Screams investigation"
title-tag = "How Spotlight PA reported its Field of Screams investigation"
topics = ["Public Safety"]
twitter-title = "How Spotlight PA reported its Field of Screams investigation"
+++

In late March 2024, a Facebook group named “Untold Stories of Field of Screams” gained attention as over 1,000 people joined the group. <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/06/field-of-screams-harassment-teenagers-volunteers/">It was not the first time that allegations against Field of Screams had gained traction online</a>.

To investigate the allegations, Spotlight PA documented the posts and reached out to their authors. Each person interviewed was asked if they knew anyone else who would speak with a reporter.

In total, Spotlight PA spoke with 18 current and former volunteers who worked at Field of Screams from 2006 through 2024. Texts, emails, and a Field of Screams document of company policies were obtained from the volunteers. In one instance, hospital records were provided to Spotlight PA to verify an incident. Six of 18 sources asked to remain anonymous due to fears of retaliation and concerns about their privacy.

The narrative scenes came from interviews with people with firsthand knowledge of the story’s central events. Some unnamed sources provided details that corroborated core points of the investigation or allowed for key individuals to be described more specifically,

A series of emails reporting an alleged sexual relationship between an adult volunteer and a teenager to Field of Screams co-owner Jim Schopf was reviewed by Spotlight PA. A reporter interviewed the teenager mentioned and obtained cell phone screenshots of conversations confirming her relationship with the adult. Spotlight PA is not naming her to protect her identity. She fears her family or friends learning about what happened to her.

Before publication, Spotlight PA emailed or mailed every person quoted or mentioned by name in the story to verify the facts of the investigation, giving them a deadline of seven days to respond.

Spotlight PA reached out to Mike King numerous times. Before publication, a certified letter outlining this story’s findings and including questions for King was sent to his home. A copy of the letter was also hand-delivered to the address and attached to the front door. Additionally, a reporter called King&#39;s phone several times, left voice messages, and sent him multiple texts. King did not respond to or acknowledge any of the outreach.

Ann Rejrat began reporting for this story at LNP | LancasterOnline, and later brought it to Spotlight PA.

