+++
authors = ["Associated Press"]
blurb = "An immigration judge stayed Subramanyam Vedam’s deportation until the Bureau of Immigration Appeals decides whether to review his case."
byline = "Associated Press"
description = "An immigration judge stayed Subramanyam Vedam’s deportation until the Bureau of Immigration Appeals decides whether to review his case."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/10/01mg-4hf1-cgz7-bv3q.png"
image-credit = "A screenshot from the freesubu.org website"
image-description = "A screenshot from the freesubu.org website"
internal-id = "APVEDDEPORT1125"
kicker = "Justice System"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-11-04T09:42:09.957-05:00
slug = "subramanyam-vedam-ice-detention-wrongful-imprisonment-justice-system"
suppress-date = false
title = "Courts order ICE not to deport man who spent 43 years in prison before murder case overturned"
title-tag = "Courts block deportation of PA man whose murder conviction was overturned"
topics = ["Justice System"]
+++

PHILADELPHIA — Two separate courts have ordered immigration officials not to deport a Pennsylvania man who spent four decades in prison before his murder conviction was overturned.

Subramanyam Vedam, 64, is currently <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/10/centre-county-murder-conviction-thrown-out-subramanyam-vedam-deported-justice-system/">detained</a> at a short-term holding center in Alexandria, Louisiana, that’s equipped with an airstrip for deportations. Vedam, a legal permanent resident known as “Subu,” was transferred there from central Pennsylvania last week, relatives said.

An immigration judge stayed his deportation on Thursday until the Bureau of Immigration Appeals decides whether to review his case. That could take several months. Vedam&#39;s lawyers also got a stay the same day in U.S. District Court in Pennsylvania, but said that case may be on hold given the immigration court ruling.

Vedam came to the U.S. legally from India as an infant and grew up in State College, where his father taught at Penn State. He was serving a life sentence in a friend&#39;s 1980 death before his conviction was overturned this year.

He was released from state prison on Oct. 3, only to be taken straight into immigration custody.

The Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement is seeking to deport Vedam over his no contest plea to charges of LSD delivery, filed when he was about 20. His lawyers argue that the four decades he wrongly spent in prison, where he earned degrees and tutored fellow inmates, should outweigh the drug case.

A Department of Homeland Security spokesperson said Monday that the reversal in the murder case does not negate the drug conviction.

“Having a single conviction vacated will not stop ICE’s enforcement of the federal immigration law,&#34; Tricia McLaughlin,&#34; Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, said in an email.

Vedam&#39;s sister said Monday that the family is relieved “that two different judges have agreed that Subu’s deportation is unwarranted while his effort to re-open his immigration case is still pending.&#34;

“We’re also hopeful that Board of Immigration Appeals will ultimately agree that Subu’s deportation would represent another untenable injustice,” Saraswathi Vedam said, &#34;inflicted on a man who not only endured 43 years in a maximum-security prison for a crime he didn’t commit, but has also lived in the U.S. since he was 9-months-old.”

