+++
authors = ["Kate Huangpu"]
blurb = "Pennsylvania’s split legislature makes it tricky for Democratic Gov. Josh Shapiro to pass his priorities. Here’s a look at his progress."
byline = "Kate Huangpu of Spotlight PA"
description = "From boosting education funding to cutting corporate taxes — how much has Governor Shapiro accomplished? Test your knowledge with our quiz."
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/02/01kv-cj2d-x171-5yyf.jpeg"
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-description = "Gov. Josh Shapiro in January 2025."
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "SPLSHAPQUIZ0225"
kicker = "Josh Shapiro"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-02-20T04:00:00-05:00
series = ["Shapiro's Promises"]
slug = "josh-shapiro-campaign-promises-quiz"
suppress-date = false
title = "Is Josh Shapiro keeping campaign promises? Test your politics knowledge with this quiz."
title-tag = "Has Gov. Shapiro kept his campaign promises? Take our quiz."
topics = ["Josh Shapiro", "The Capitol"]
+++

HARRISBURG —&nbsp;<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/topics/josh-shapiro/">Gov. Josh Shapiro</a> made a lot of ambitious promises while he was on the campaign trail, from cracking down on guns, to increasing education funding, to raising the minimum wage, to cutting corporate taxes.

But it’s one thing to set goals, and another entirely to get them through the legislative process, or figure out a way to accomplish them unilaterally.

Despite a split legislature and one of the <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2024/12/pennsylvania-legislature-laws-passed-health-care-education-future-actions/">least productive sessions</a> in the past three decades, Shapiro, a Democrat, managed to make progress on some of his priorities. Others remain incomplete or untouched.

Which is which? Test your state government know-how regarding Shapiro’s campaign promises with this quiz.

<em>Don’t see the quiz below? Find it </em><a href="https://hsqxo6lncmz.typeform.com/shapiroquiz"><em>here</em></a><em>.</em>

{{<typeform id="01JMFZYPKVX4APAGHVE0973BND" >}}

