+++
authors = ["Asha Prihar"]
blurb = "Take Spotlight PA’s short quiz to help you decide how to spend your fall weekends in Pennsylvania. There are a dozen possible outcomes, sourced from our staff."
byline = "Asha Prihar of Spotlight PA"
description = "Take our short quiz to help you decide how to spend your fall weekends in Pennsylvania. There are a dozen possible outcomes, sourced from our staff."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/10/01me-fzk2-03xr-d9x6.jpeg"
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-description = "Green, red, and orange trees viewed from afar."
internal-id = "SPLFALLQUIZ1025"
kicker = "PA Local"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-10-10T05:15:00-04:00
slug = "fall-things-to-do-quiz-2025-pennsylvania-local"
suppress-date = false
title = "How should you spend this fall weekend in Pa.? This quiz can help you decide."
title-tag = "Plan the perfect Pennsylvania fall weekend"
topics = ["PA Local"]
+++

From the <a href="https://www.pa.gov/agencies/dcnr/conservation/forests-and-tree/fall-foliage-reports">vibrant foliage</a> to the <a href="https://www.axios.com/local/pittsburgh/2025/09/09/pennsylvania-pumpkin-production-2024">prolific pumpkin production</a>, Pennsylvania’s fall vibes are strong. The sheer abundance of autumnal activities can make it difficult to choose exactly how to enjoy the season, though.

Worry not! Spotlight PA has put together a short quiz to help you decide how to spend your fall weekends, based on your own mood and preferences. There are a dozen possible outcomes, with many of them highlighting our staffers’ favorite fall spots around the commonwealth.

The quiz takes just one minute to complete. If you don’t like your result or want to get even more ideas for a weekend excursion, you can refresh the page and retake it as many times as you’d like.

{{<typeform id="01K72KN65WNCGVXGV9H6SN9D6P" >}}

If you encounter any technical issues, email us (<a href="mailto:newsletters@spotlightpa.org">newsletters@spotlightpa.org</a>) with a heads up. And if you like what you see, share this with a friend! Happy fall. 🍂<strong><em></em></strong>

