+++
authors = ["Colin Deppen"]
blurb = "Like many of you, we at Spotlight PA enjoy a good crossword puzzle. So we decided to make our own. Test your knowledge of Pennsylvania and its towns."
byline = "Colin Deppen of Spotlight PA"
description = "Like many of you, we at Spotlight PA enjoy a good crossword puzzle. So we decided to make our own. Test your knowledge of Pennsylvania and its towns."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/07/01m6-ta5q-2hfv-ams5.png"
image-credit = "Spotlight PA illustration"
image-description = "A crossword puzzle graphic reading \"Crossword PA\""
internal-id = "SPLCROSSWORD0725"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-07-09T07:00:00-04:00
slug = "pennsylvania-crossword-puzzle-games-brain"
suppress-date = false
title = "‘Name that Pennsylvania town’ in our new crossword puzzle"
title-tag = "Can you solve this Pennsylvania crossword puzzle?"
+++

Like many of you, we at Spotlight PA enjoy a good crossword puzzle. So we decided to make our own with help from the folks at Amuse Labs and cruciverbalist Russell Frank.

Months after a mini version sent to readers of our weekly <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters/palocal/">PA Local newsletter</a> yielded responses such as “I enjoyed it and learned new facts about PA,” “stress free at a time when needed,” and “Loved it!!” we decided to create a longer and more challenging puzzle with a theme:

Name That Pennsylvania Town.

While crosswords aren’t a regular Spotlight PA feature as of now, your feedback could change that. Here’s <a href="https://hsqxo6lncmz.typeform.com/to/wULCX8R2">a short questionnaire</a> to fill out after you’ve played.

For now, a few important pointers to get you started:

- There is a timer function. It can be hidden in the &#34;settings&#34; tab. (That&#39;s the sprocket symbol on mobile.)

- There are hints and other aids in the &#34;assist&#34; tab. (That&#39;s the light bulb symbol on mobile.)

- On the “check letter” or “check word” assist features, mistakes will be highlighted in red. Correct letters or words will show no change in appearance.

- If you&#39;d like to print a copy, simply hit &#34;print.&#34; (On mobile, you&#39;ll find it by clicking on the three horizontal lines in the upper-left corner of your screen.)

If you encounter any technical issues, email Lead Editor of News Products Colin Deppen (<a href="mailto:newsletters@spotlightpa.org">newsletters@spotlightpa.org</a>).

If you’re not seeing the puzzle below, <a href="https://puzzleme.amuselabs.com/pmm/crossword?id=695be8d8&amp;set=8f2783eb09b5fc82a38afa2bc16cc46229d36df12a171a7b317752dda9c4a391">click here to start</a>.

And good luck!

{{<embed/raw srcdoc="&lt;!-- Include the CryptoJS library for hashing the user id before sending it to the PuzzleMe server. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script src=&#34;https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/crypto-js/4.1.1/crypto-js.min.js&#34;&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Include the javascript library for embedding this puzzle. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script id=&#34;pm-script&#34; src=&#34;https://puzzleme.amuselabs.com/pmm/js/puzzleme-embed.js&#34;&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Specify the Amuse Labs server name from where the puzzles will be served and trigger the embed flow. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script&gt;&#10;    PM_Config.PM_BasePath = &#34;https://puzzleme.amuselabs.com/pmm/&#34;;&#10;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Specifies the puzzle to be embedded on the page. If you want to render multiple games on your page then you can copy paste it multiple times. --&gt;&#10;&lt;div style=&#34;position: relative; text-align: center;&#34;&gt;&lt;div class=&#34;pm-embed-div&#34; data-id=&#34;695be8d8&#34; data-set=&#34;8f2783eb09b5fc82a38afa2bc16cc46229d36df12a171a7b317752dda9c4a391&#34; data-puzzleType=&#34;crossword&#34; data-height=&#34;700px&#34; data-mobileMargin=&#34;10px&#34;&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;div class=&#34;pm-attribution-div&#34; style=&#34;font-family: sans-serif; font-size: 12px; color: rgb(102, 102, 102); position: absolute; top: 100%; left: 50%; transform: translate(-50%, 0px); padding-top: 5px; width: 100%;&#34;&gt;Made by   Russell Frank   using PuzzleMe&#39;s online &lt;a href=&#34;https://amuselabs.com/games/crossword/&#34; target=&#34;_blank&#34; style=&#34;color: #666666; text-decoration: underline;&#34;&gt;cross word builder&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;/div&gt;">}}

