+++
authors = ["Associated Press"]
blurb = "Roughly 750,000 federal employees could be furloughed, and they could lose out on $400 million in daily wages."
byline = "Associated Press"
description = "Roughly 750,000 federal employees could be furloughed, and they could lose out on $400 million in daily wages."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/10/01md-tbr0-fr4w-x5v0.jpeg"
image-credit = "J. Scott Applewhite / AP"
image-description = "The Capitol is seen on the first day of a government shutdown, in Washington, Wednesday, Oct. 1, 2025."
internal-id = "APSHUTUPD1025"
kicker = "Federal Government"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-10-03T13:13:17.292-04:00
slug = "federal-shutdown-healthcare-congress-standoff-federal-government"
suppress-date = false
title = "Hopes fade for quick end to federal government shutdown as Trump readies layoffs and cuts"
title-tag = "Workers face layoffs as federal shutdown battle continues"
topics = ["Federal Government"]
+++

WASHINGTON — Hopes for a quick end to <a href="https://apnews.com/article/trump-government-shutdown-firings-layoffs-vought-1fd57313272ec4db5984f653b095be33">the government shutdown</a> were fading Friday as Republicans and Democrats dug in for a prolonged fight and <a href="https://apnews.com/hub/donald-trump">President Donald Trump</a> readied plans to unleash layoffs and cuts across the federal government.

Senators were headed back to the Capitol for another vote on government funding on the third day of the shutdown, but there has been no sign of any real progress toward ending their standoff. <a href="https://apnews.com/article/health-care-subsidies-congress-shutdown-democrats-republicans-bb3464820a347fd2c0399e78e335881e">Democrats are demanding</a> that Congress extend health care benefits, while Republicans are trying to wear them down with day after day of <a href="https://apnews.com/article/government-shutdown-congress-trump-health-care-54b2a584657a0b619bc8326708a05604">voting on a House-passed bill</a> that would reopen the government temporarily, mostly at current spending levels.

“I don’t know how many times you’re going to give them a chance to vote no,” Senate Majority Leader John Thune said at a news conference Friday. He added that he would give Democratic senators the weekend to think it over.

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

Although Republicans control the White House and both chambers of Congress, <a href="https://apnews.com/article/donald-trump-filibusters-gun-politics-government-and-politics-93c53b3aa8d2b91d3c2d5884f3cdf139">the Senate&#39;s filibuster rules</a> make it necessary for the government funding legislation to gain support from at least 60 of the 100 senators. That&#39;s given Democrats a rare opportunity to use their 47 Senate seats to hold out in exchange for policy concessions. The party has chosen to rally on the issue of health care, believing it could be key to their path back to power in Washington.

Their primary demand is that Congress extend tax credits that were boosted during the COVID-19 pandemic for health care plans offered under the Affordable Care Act marketplace.

Standing on the steps of the U.S. Capitol on Thursday, House Democratic leader Hakeem Jeffries said, “Understand this, over the last few days and over the next few days, what you’re going to see is more than 20 million Americans experience dramatically increased health care premiums, co-pays and deductibles because of the Republican unwillingness to extend the Affordable Care Act tax credits.”

## The shutdown gamble

Democrats are running <a href="https://apnews.com/article/democrats-republicans-shutdown-negotiations-votes-health-care-29b11579bfc694a52b9e8e272a47bb91">the high-risk strategy</a> of effectively voting for a government shutdown to make their stand. Trump has vowed to make it as painful as possible for them.

<a href="https://apnews.com/article/trump-project-2025-russ-vought-shutdown-2d1ea5e6e32c583ddf6b8a8164e523c3">The Republican president</a> has called the government funding lapse an “unprecedented opportunity” to make vast cuts to federal agencies and potentially lay off federal workers, rather than the typical practice of furloughing them. White House budget director <a href="https://apnews.com/article/trump-doge-russell-vought-project-2025-f403174299933b7e3a3b6ebd779c146c">Russ Vought</a> has already announced that he is <a href="https://apnews.com/article/shutdown-new-york-rail-projects-money-withheld-ada494e08ae9ae5269c6ce554ecdbd43">withholding billions of dollars for infrastructure projects</a> in states with Democratic senators.

On Friday morning, Vought said he would <a href="https://apnews.com/article/government-shutdown-chicago-infrastructure-funding-9ef6c7829fc85553bf8d3dbaa759611e">withhold another $2.1 billion for Chicago infrastructure</a> projects to extend its train system to the city&#39;s South Side.

Jeffries has displayed no signs of budging under those threats.

“The cruelty that they might unleash on everyday Americans using the pretense of a shutdown is only going to backfire against them,” he said during an interview with The Associated Press and other outlets at the Capitol.

Still, the shutdown, no matter how long it lasts, could have far-reaching effects on the economy.

Roughly 750,000 federal employees could be furloughed, according to <a href="https://apnews.com/article/congressional-budget-office-swagel-trump-bill-3a76f5ce1f7bd02c1dac2269d87d91db">the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office</a>, and they could lose out on $400 million in daily wages. That loss in wages until after the government reopens could drive down wider demand for goods and services.

&#34;All around the country right now, real pain is being endured by real people because the Democrats have decided to play politics,&#34; said House Speaker Mike Johnson on Friday.

## Who will take the blame?

The American public usually spreads the blame around to both major political parties when it comes to a government shutdown. While Trump took a significant portion of the blame during the last partial government shutdown in 2018 as he demanded funding for a U.S.-Mexico border wall, this standoff could <a href="https://apnews.com/article/polling-government-shutdown-trump-democrats-republicans-blame-7ad1810afa5c2990ee2fbd584db5873c">end differently</a> because now it is Democrats making the policy demands.

Still, lawmakers were <a href="https://apnews.com/article/donald-trump-congress-chuck-schumer-shutdown-6a420d356335f738c874381b6ade3c10">relentlessly trying to make their case</a> to the American public with a constant beat of news conferences, social media videos, and livestreams. Congressional leaders have been especially active.

Both sides expressed confidence that the other would ultimately be found at fault. And in the House, party leaders seemed to be moving farther apart rather than closer to making a deal to end the shutdown.

Jeffries on Thursday called for a permanent extension to the ACA tax credits. Meanwhile, Johnson and Thune told reporters that they would not negotiate on the tax credits until the government is reopened.

## Talks in the Senate

A few senators have engaged in bipartisan talks about launching negotiations on extending the ACA tax credits for one year while the Senate votes to reopen the government for several weeks. But those discussions are in their early stages and appear to have little involvement from leadership.

As senators prepared for their last scheduled vote for the week on Friday, they appeared resigned to allow the shutdown to continue at least into next week. Thune said that if the vote failed, he would “give them the weekend to think about it” before holding more votes.

Sen. Amy Klobuchar, in a floor speech, called for Republicans to work with her and fellow Democrats to find “common ground” on the ACA subsidies, saying their expiration would impact plenty of people in states with GOP senators — especially in rural areas where farmers, ranchers, and small business owners purchase their own health insurance.

“Unfortunately, right now our Republican colleagues are not working with us to find a bipartisan agreement to prevent the government shutdown and address the health care crisis,” she said. “We know that even when they float ideas — which we surely do appreciate — in the end the president appears to make the call.”<strong></strong>

