+++
authors = ["Associated Press"]
blurb = "All but one Republican member of Pennsylvania’s congressional delegation voted to support Trump’s $4.5 trillion tax breaks and spending cuts bill."
byline = "Associated Press"
description = "All but one Republican member of Pennsylvania’s congressional delegation voted to support Trump’s $4.5 trillion tax breaks and spending cuts bill."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/07/01m6-dm42-wd1j-5mdy.jpeg"
image-credit = "J. Scott Applewhite / AP"
image-description = "Speaker of the House Mike Johnson at the Capitol before the final passage of President Donald Trump's tax cuts bill."
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "APBBBPASS0725"
kicker = "Federal government"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-07-03T14:42:51.516-04:00
slug = "trump-tax-cuts-house-final-approval-congress"
suppress-date = false
title = "Trump tax cuts win final House approval in narrow vote"
title-tag = "Trump tax cuts pass final House vote with PA GOP support"
topics = ["Federal Government"]
+++

WASHINGTON — House Republicans propelled President Donald Trump&#39;s $4.5 trillion tax breaks and spending cuts bill to final congressional passage Thursday, overcoming multiple setbacks to approve his signature second-term policy package before a Fourth of July deadline.

The tight roll call, 218-214, came at a potentially high political cost, with two Republicans joining all Democrats opposed. GOP leaders worked overnight, and the president himself leaned on a handful of skeptics to drop their opposition and send the bill to him to sign into law. Democratic leader Hakeem Jeffries of New York delayed voting by holding the floor for more than eight hours with a record-breaking speech against the bill.

&#34;We have a big job to finish,&#34; said House Speaker Mike Johnson, R-La. &#34;With one big beautiful bill, we are going to make this country stronger, safer, and more prosperous than ever before.&#34;

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

The outcome delivers a milestone for the president, by his Friday goal, and for his party,. It was a long-shot effort to compile a lengthy list of GOP priorities into what they called his &#34;one big beautiful bill,&#34; an 800-plus page measure. With Democrats unified in opposition, the bill will become a defining measure of Trump&#39;s return to the White House, aided by Republican control of Congress.

All but one Republican member of Pennsylvania’s congressional delegation <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2025/07/03/us/house-megabill-vote.html">voted</a> to support the bill. U.S. Rep. Brian Fitzpatrick (R., Pa.) and all commonwealth Democrats voted against it.

## Tax breaks and safety net cuts

At its core, the package&#39;s priority is $4.5 trillion in tax breaks enacted in 2017 during Trump&#39;s first term that would expire if Congress failed to act, along with new ones. This includes allowing workers to deduct tips and overtime pay, and a $6,000 deduction for most older adults earning less than $75,000 a year.

There&#39;s also a hefty investment, some $350 billion, in national security and Trump&#39;s deportation agenda, and to help develop the &#34;Golden Dome&#34; defensive system over the U.S.

To help offset the lost tax revenue, the package includes $1.2 trillion in cutbacks to Medicaid health care and food stamps, largely by imposing new work requirements, including for some parents and older people, and a major rollback of green energy tax credits.

<strong><em>&gt;&gt; READ MORE: </em></strong><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/07/trump-big-beautiful-bill-snap-food-stamps-pennsylvania/"><strong><em>Trump’s massive tax bill could cost Pa. $800M to keep food benefits program going</em></strong></a><strong><em></em></strong>

The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office estimates the package will add $3.3 trillion to the deficit over the decade, and 11.8 million more people will go without health coverage.

&#34;This was a generational opportunity to deliver the most comprehensive and consequential set of conservative reforms in modern history, and that&#39;s exactly what we&#39;re doing,&#34; said Rep. Jodey Arrington, R-Texas, the House Budget Committee chairman.

## Democrats united against &#39;ugly bill&#39;

Democrats unified against the bill as a tax giveaway to the rich paid for on the backs of the working class and most vulnerable in society, what they called &#34;trickle down cruelty.&#34; Tensions ran high in the chamber.

Jeffries began the speech at 4:53 a.m. EDT and finished at 1:37 p.m. EDT, 8 hours, 44 minutes later, a record, as he argued against what he called Trump&#39;s &#34;big ugly bill.&#34;

&#34;We&#39;re better than this,&#34; Jeffries said, who used a leader&#39;s prerogative for unlimited debate and read letter after letter from Americans writing about their reliance of the health care programs.

&#34;I never thought that I&#39;d be on the House floor saying that this is a crime scene,&#34; Jeffries said.

&#34;It&#39;s a crime scene, going after the health, and the safety, and the well-being of the American people.&#34;

And as Democrats, he said, &#34;We want no part of it.&#34;

Hauling the package through Congress has been difficult from the start. Republicans have struggled mightily with the bill nearly every step of the way quarreling in the House and Senate, and often succeeding only by the narrowest of margins: just one vote.

The Senate passed the package days earlier with Vice President JD Vance breaking the tie vote. The slim majority in the House left Republicans little room for defections.

“It wasn’t beautiful enough for me to vote for it,” said Rep. Thomas Massie, R-Ky. Also voting no was Fitzpatrick of Pennsylvania, who said he was concerned about cuts to Medicaid.

Once Johnson gaveled the tally, Republicans cheered “USA!” and flashed Trump-style thumbs-up to the cameras.

## Political costs of saying no

Despite their discomfort with various aspects of the sprawling package, in some ways it became too big to fail — in part because Republicans found it difficult to buck Trump.

As Wednesday&#39;s stalled floor action dragged overnight, Trump railed against the delays.

&#34;What are the Republicans waiting for???&#34; the president said in a midnight post. &#34;What are you trying to prove???&#34;

Johnson relied heavily on White House Cabinet secretaries, lawyers and others to satisfy skeptical GOP holdouts. Moderate Republicans worried about the severity of cuts while conservatives pressed for steeper reductions. Lawmakers said they were being told the administration could provide executive actions, projects or other provisions in their districts back home.

The alternative was clear. Republicans who staked out opposition to the bill, including Rep. Thomas Massie of Kentucky, and Sen. Thom Tillis of North Carolina, were being warned by Trump&#39;s well-funded political operation. Tillis soon after announced he would not seek reelection.

## Rollback of past presidential agendas

In many ways, the package is a repudiation of the agendas of the last two Democratic presidents, a chiseling away at the Medicaid expansion from Barack Obama&#39;s Affordable Care Act, and a pullback of Joe Biden&#39;s climate change strategies in the Inflation Reduction Act.

Democrats have described the bill in dire terms, warning that cuts to Medicaid, which some 80 million Americans rely on, would result in lives lost. Food stamps that help feed more than 40 million people would &#34;rip food from the mouths of hungry children, hungry veterans, and hungry seniors,&#34; Jeffries said.

Republicans say the tax breaks will prevent a tax hike on households and grow the economy. They maintain they are trying to rightsize the safety net programs for the population they were initially designed to serve, mainly pregnant women, the disabled, and children, and root out what they describe as waste, fraud, and abuse.

The Tax Policy Center, which provides nonpartisan analysis of tax and budget policy, projected the bill would result next year in a $150 tax break for the lowest quintile of Americans, a $1,750 tax cut for the middle quintile, and a $10,950 tax cut for the top quintile. That&#39;s compared with what they would face if the 2017 tax cuts expired.

