+++
blurb = "Hear author Liz Moore discuss Philly, family, addiction, and other themes from her bestselling novel \"Long Bright River.\""
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Hear author Liz Moore discuss Philly, family, addiction, and other themes from her bestselling novel \"Long Bright River.\""
draft = false
event-date = 2025-07-10T10:00:00-04:00
event-title = "Long Bright River"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_4iRVT8S2RAGCQG7gWrMVvw#/registration"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/07/01m7-03dz-n5vz-r5sd.png"
image-credit = "Photo submitted"
image-description = "Author of \"Long Bright River,\" Liz Moore"
image-gravity = "ea"
internal-id = "SPLLIZMOORE0625"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-06-05T16:15:55.247-04:00
slug = "pennsylvania-liz-moore-event-long-bright-river-kensington-philadelphia"
suppress-date = false
title = "WATCH: A live Q&A with ‘Long Bright River’ author Liz Moore"
title-tag = "WATCH: Liz Moore on 'Long Bright River'"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

Liz Moore’s <em>Long Bright River </em>became an instant hit, landing on the New York Times bestseller list and being crowned one of Barack Obama’s favorite books of 2020. The gritty novel follows Mickey, a no-nonsense cop, and her sister Kacey, who are on opposite sides of Philadelphia’s opioid epidemic.

Moore weaves a complex story of adolescence, addiction, and family against the backdrop of a thrilling murder mystery. It was no surprise that the novel’s popularity earned it a TV adaptation on Peacock, released in early March.

Spotlight PA recently sat down with Moore to unpack the major themes of the book and show, and get an inside look at what it was like to create an intimate view of Philadelphia’s Kensington neighborhood. The event took place Thursday, July 10 on Zoom.

{{<embed/raw srcdoc="&lt;!-- Include the CryptoJS library for hashing the user id before sending it to the PuzzleMe server. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script src=&#34;https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/crypto-js/4.1.1/crypto-js.min.js&#34;&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Include the javascript library for embedding this puzzle. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script id=&#34;pm-script&#34; src=&#34;https://puzzleme.amuselabs.com/pmm/js/puzzleme-embed.js&#34;&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Specify the Amuse Labs server name from where the puzzles will be served and trigger the embed flow. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script&gt;&#10;    PM_Config.PM_BasePath = &#34;https://puzzleme.amuselabs.com/pmm/&#34;;&#10;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Specifies the puzzle to be embedded on the page. If you want to render multiple games on your page then you can copy paste it multiple times. --&gt;&#10;&lt;div style=&#34;position: relative; text-align: center;&#34;&gt;&lt;div class=&#34;pm-embed-div&#34; data-id=&#34;695be8d8&#34; data-set=&#34;8f2783eb09b5fc82a38afa2bc16cc46229d36df12a171a7b317752dda9c4a391&#34; data-puzzleType=&#34;crossword&#34; data-height=&#34;700px&#34; data-mobileMargin=&#34;10px&#34;&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;div class=&#34;pm-attribution-div&#34; style=&#34;font-family: sans-serif; font-size: 12px; color: rgb(102, 102, 102); position: absolute; top: 100%; left: 50%; transform: translate(-50%, 0px); padding-top: 5px; width: 100%;&#34;&gt;Made by   Russell Frank   using PuzzleMe&#39;s online &lt;a href=&#34;https://amuselabs.com/games/crossword/&#34; target=&#34;_blank&#34; style=&#34;color: #666666; text-decoration: underline;&#34;&gt;cross word builder&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;/div&gt;">}}

<strong><em>» Spotlight PA’s events operate on a “pay-what-you-can” honor system.</em></strong><em> If you value programming like this, pay it forward and contribute any amount to Spotlight PA now so we can keep our programming free for everyone: </em><a href="http://spotlightpa.org/donate"><em>spotlightpa.org/donate</em></a><em>.</em>

