+++
blurb = "Rather than make you wait until next week, we’re providing answers to the Thanksgiving Day Scramblers, Riddlers, and trivia from our newsletters here."
byline = "Spotlight PA staff"
description = "Rather than make you wait until next week, we’re providing answers to the Thanksgiving Day Scramblers, Riddlers, and trivia from our newsletters here."
draft = false
feed-exclude = true
image = "2025/11/01mh-s6wt-8j4q-dh0e.jpeg"
image-credit = "Joseph Kaczmarek / AP Photo"
image-description = "Handlers walk the turkey balloon down the Benjamin Franklin Parkway in Philadelphia during the Thanksgiving Day Parade."
internal-id = "SPLPUZZLES1125"
kicker = "Puzzles"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-11-27T04:00:00-05:00
slug = "thanksgiving-day-2025-scrambler-riddler-trivia-answers-pennsylvania-puzzles"
suppress-date = false
title = "Answers to Spotlight PA’s 2025 Thanksgiving Day Scrambler, Riddler, and trivia puzzles"
title-tag = "Answers to Spotlight PA’s 2025 Thanksgiving Day puzzles"
+++

Rather than making you wait until next week, we’re providing answers to the Thanksgiving Day Scramblers, Riddlers, and PA Local trivia from our newsletters here. You’ll find the clues recapped up top and the answers below. We hope you have a great holiday, and we’ll get back to the news next week.

If you feel thankful for Spotlight PA’s fearless, independent journalism, <a href="https://spotlightpa.donorsupport.co/page/donate-onetime?utm_campaign=Thanksgiving%20Scrambler%20-%20PA%20Post%2011%2028%2024&amp;utm_source=ActiveCampaign&amp;utm_medium=email&amp;utm_content=A%20special%20Thanksgiving%20Scrambler%20edition">become a member now</a>.

SCRAMBLER CLUES

1. D R E T I G A U T

2. F E L R O T S E V

3. E C Y R A R N R B

4. E H W S I N O B

5. O N C L L A O I

RIDDLER CLUES

Case No. 341: To what might you turn if you have a hole in your boot, or need a way to use up some fruit?

Case No. 342: What can you find on a palm tree, in an invitation, and with Hinge?

Case No. 343: I’m a flower that doesn’t bloom, sounds like a month, and floats over water. What am I?

Case No. 344: Doing this to a hedge makes it weigh less, but doing it to an evergreen tree in December makes it weigh more.

Case No. 345: You can find me in a hat, attached to a berry, or at the end of your wits. What am I?

TRIVIA CLUES

1. Which famous Pennsylvanian wrote the following? “I am on this account not displeased that the figure is not known as a bald eagle, but looks more like a turkey. For in truth, the turkey is in comparison a much more respectable bird, and withal a true original native of America.”

2. Molasses is the main ingredient in which classic Pennsylvania Dutch pie?

3. What type of soup — made with black pepper, vegetables, tripe, and dumplings — was often made and sold by Black women in Philadelphia during the 19th century and became a popular street food?

4. In which Pennsylvania county did George Washington’s first (and only) surrender happen?

5. True or false? It’s illegal to own a pet hedgehog in Pennsylvania.

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

SCRAMBLER ANSWERS

1. GRATITUDE

2. LEFTOVERS

3. CRANBERRY

4. WISHBONE

5. COLONIAL

RIDDLER ANSWERS

Case No. 341: A cobbler

Case No. 342: A date

Case No. 343: The Mayflower

Case No. 344: Trimming

Case No. 345: Straw

TRIVIA ANSWERS

1. Benjamin Franklin

2. Shoofly

3. Pepper pot soup

4. Fayette; the Battle of Fort Necessity in 1754, part of the French &amp; Indian War

5. True

