+++
authors = ["Yaasmeen Piper"]
blurb = "As part of Spotlight PA’s new book club, read the hit novel, connect with readers across the state, and join a live discussion on Sept. 25 with the author."
byline = "Yaasmeen Piper of Spotlight PA"
description = "Bestselling author Jessamine Chan joins us on Sep. 25 for a live, virtual discussion."
draft = false
event-date = 2025-09-25T18:00:00-04:00
event-title = "The School for Good Mothers"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_pxh0caSrSJORWGXblaAx5w#/registration"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/08/01ma-esmn-xj2a-gsmy.png"
image-credit = "Provided"
image-gravity = "we"
internal-id = "SPLCHAN0825"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-08-21T14:36:12.908-04:00
slug = "jessamine-chan-book-club-school-for-good-mothers-events"
suppress-date = false
title = "Booklight PA: Read ‘The School for Good Mothers’ and discuss it with author Jessamine Chan"
title-tag = "Ask Jessamine Chan about her hit book ‘The School for Good Mothers’"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

Frida Liu’s life is not what she expected. The protagonist in Jessamine Chan’s bestselling novel, <em>The School for Good Mothers</em>, is struggling in her career and marriage. Her only solace is her daughter. But when the government takes her, Frida must prove through a series of trials that she is fit to be a mother.

As part of Spotlight PA’s new book club pilot, Booklight PA, we’re reading Chan’s debut novel and discussing it with readers across the state on Discord. (<a href="https://discord.gg/UndEthCM">Join now</a>!) Then, on Sept. 25 from 6 to 7 p.m., Chan will join us via Zoom to answer your questions on her Philly-based novel.

<em>The School for Good Mothers </em>made the New York Times Best Seller list, was chosen as a “Today” show book club pick, and was longlisted for the PEN/Hemingway Award for Debut Novel and the Carnegie Medal.

This event is in partnership with <a href="https://anovelideaphilly.com/book-list/">A Novel Idea</a>, a community-minded bookstore and event space based in East Passyunk, Philadelphia, run by Alexander Schneider and Christina Rosso-Schneider. <a href="https://bookshop.org/lists/spotlight-pa-book-club">Purchase your books here</a> and <a href="https://libro.fm/playlists/10229?bookstore=anovelideaphilly">find audiobook versions here</a>.

Register and submit your questions for Chan <a href="https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_pxh0caSrSJORWGXblaAx5w">here</a>. And <a href="https://discord.com/invite/Srnev4Fa8K">join our Discord group chat</a> to discuss the book as you go.

If you enjoyed <em>The School for Good Mothers</em>, find book recommendations from author Jessamine Chan below:

<strong>Nonfiction:</strong>

- <em>Torn Apart</em> - Dorothy Roberts

- <em>Invisible Child</em> - Andrea Elliott

- <em>Investigating Families</em> - Kelley Fong

- <em>Relinquished</em> - Gretchen Sisson

- <em>We Were Once a Family</em> - Roxanna Asgarian

- <em>Screaming on the Inside</em> - Jessica Grose

<strong>Fiction:</strong>

- <em>Nightbitch</em> - Rachel Yoder

- <em>Hum</em> - Helen Phillips

- <em>The Women Could Fly</em> - Megan Giddings

- <em>Man V. Nature</em> - Diane Cook

- <em>Mercy Street</em> - Jennifer Haigh

- <em>The Stepford Wives</em> - Ira Levin

- <em>The Wilderness</em> - Angela Flournoy

<strong>UPCOMING BOOKLIGHT PA EVENTS:</strong>

<strong>Oct. 23</strong>: <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/09/stephanie-feldman-book-club-saturnalia-philadelphia-pennsylvania-events/"><em>Saturnalia</em>, Stephanie Feldman</a>

<strong>Nov. 18</strong>: <em>If Sons, Then Heirs,</em> Lorene Cary<strong></strong>

