+++
blurb = "Does a key PA Republican support Gov. Josh Shapiro’s budget? We held an event on May 12 to find out."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Does a key PA Republican support Gov. Josh Shapiro’s budget? We held an event on May 12 to find out."
event-date = 2025-05-12T06:00:00-04:00
event-title = "Budget Rundown"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_V9Lk1Uh8TciG8QWJ1YohAQ#/registration"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/04/01m1-4sxa-74dp-pbjp.jpeg"
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-description = "State Sen. Scott Martin (far right) with Gov. Josh Shapiro and other officials."
image-gravity = "ea"
internal-id = "SPLBUDMART0425"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "WATCH: Get answers on Pennsylvania's budget battle"
pinned = false
published = 2025-04-30T14:11:50.827-04:00
slug = "pennsylvania-budget-battle-shapiro-gop-spending-plan-event"
suppress-date = false
title = "WATCH: What a top GOP lawmaker thinks of Shapiro’s budget pitch"
title-tag = "What a top GOP lawmaker thinks about Josh Shapiro’s budget"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

Between now and June 30, Pennsylvania lawmakers will negotiate a state budget. This process is expected to feature debate, disagreement, and (possibly) deals on issues ranging from funding public transit to legalizing marijuana to dealing with the commonwealth’s structural deficit.

Democratic Gov. Josh Shapiro’s goals are already on record. He wants to send more money to Pennsylvania’s poorest public schools, tax skill games, and <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/02/marijuana-cannabis-recreational-legalization-pennsylvania-josh-shapiro-budget-gop-support/">legalize</a> recreational cannabis <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/02/josh-shapiro-pennsylvania-budget-legal-weed/">as part of his $51.5 billion budget proposal</a>.

Democrats, who control the state House, are largely on the same page. State Rep. Jordan Harris, who chairs the chamber’s Appropriations Committee, told Spotlight PA <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/02/reporting-event-pennsylvania-budget-jordan-harris-josh-shapiro/">at a live event in February</a> that Shapiro’s proposal has “put together ways to generate revenue while also expanding … the scope of businesses that want to come here and do business here in Pennsylvania.”

Republicans, who control the state Senate, have their own priorities. Namely, they’re concerned that Shapiro’s plan requires an 8% spending increase that would force the state to use the last of its $3 billion surplus, plus $1.6 billion from the rainy day fund.

To talk through those concerns and his caucus’ budget hopes, state Sen. Scott Martin, chair of his chamber’s Appropriations Committee, joined Spotlight PA’s Stephen Caruso for a live conversation and audience Q&amp;A. The event took place Monday, May 12, from 6-7 p.m. on Zoom.

{{<vimeo id="1083937340" secret="ba742d598f" >}}

