+++
authors = ["Asha Prihar"]
blurb = "Match 10 quotes to their speakers — prominent people who’ve lived in Pennsylvania. Test your knowledge with this quick game from Spotlight PA."
byline = "Asha Prihar of Spotlight PA"
description = "Match 10 quotes to their speakers — prominent people who’ve lived in Pennsylvania. Test your knowledge with this quick game from Spotlight PA."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/11/01mh-byfy-dmj4-4k4j.png"
image-caption = "A map of Pennsylvania surrounded by cutouts of celebrities and other figures."
image-credit = "Illustration by Asha Prihar of Spotlight PA"
image-description = "A map of Pennsylvania surrounded by cutouts of celebrities and other figures."
internal-id = "SPLQUOTEQUIZ1125"
kicker = "PA Local"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "Which famous Pennsylvanian said it? Test your knowledge"
pinned = false
published = 2025-11-14T05:00:00.235-05:00
slug = "famous-quotes-taylor-swift-sabrina-carpenter-benjamin-franklin-pennsylvania-local"
suppress-date = false
title = "Quiz: Can you match famous Pennsylvanians to their words?"
title-tag = "Guess the famous Pennsylvanian behind these quotes"
topics = ["PA Local"]
twitter-title = "Which famous Pennsylvanian said it? Test your knowledge"
+++

Pennsylvania has been home to plenty of famous residents throughout its history, from artists to politicians to business magnates. Can you recognize their words?

In this quiz, we’ll show you 10 quotes from notable people — some living, some dead — who’ve called the Keystone State home at some point in their lives. Your job, for each quotation, will be to match the words to their speaker, choosing from a list of three prominent Pennsylvanians.

The game takes about two or three minutes to complete. Are you up for the challenge?

{{<typeform id="01K9SW072TTNXHZATAKAJZ55H5" >}}

Let us know if you encounter any technical issues. Just email Newsletter Editor Colin Deppen (newsletters@spotlightpa.org) with a heads up. And good luck!<strong><em></em></strong>

