+++
authors = ["Katie Meyer"]
blurb = "Impacted Amtrak lines could include the Keystone and Pennsylvanian, which serve Pittsburgh, Harrisburg, and Philadelphia."
byline = "Katie Meyer of Spotlight PA"
description = "Impacted Amtrak lines could include the Keystone and Pennsylvanian, which serve Pittsburgh, Harrisburg, and Philadelphia."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/08/01ma-925p-f39n-gmf7.jpeg"
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-description = "The Amtrak station in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania."
internal-id = "SPLAMTRAK0825"
kicker = "The Capitol"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-08-19T10:30:15.669-04:00
slug = "amtrak-train-service-septa-funding-budget-cuts-keystone-capitol"
suppress-date = false
title = "Amtrak: SEPTA cuts could affect service all across Pennsylvania"
title-tag = "SEPTA cuts may impact Amtrak trains across PA"
topics = ["The Capitol"]
+++

As Philadelphia’s SEPTA prepares to eliminate regional rail service on several lines it leases from Amtrak, the national rail operator says the move could affect its ability to maintain intercity trains all across Pennsylvania.

According to an Amtrak spokesperson, the reduction in lease money that SEPTA pays to Amtrak “could lead to a deterioration in infrastructure condition and authorized train operating speeds.”

The result, they said, would be “negatively impacting Amtrak-operated, PennDOT-sponsored Keystone Service and Pennsylvanian service between Philadelphia, Harrisburg, and Pittsburgh, as well as Northeast Corridor services.”

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

SEPTA, Pennsylvania’s largest transit system that serves Philadelphia and its suburbs, plans to dramatically cut service beginning next week after the state legislature <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/08/pennsylvania-budget-impasse-septa-transit-funding-joe-pittman-state-senate-capitol/">was unable to pass roughly $300 million</a> in additional funding the agency says it needs.

Fewer trips, shortened routes, and total elimination of some lines are planned as part of the service cuts, which will affect buses, trolleys, and trains within the city, as well as to several regional rail lines.

On Monday, <a href="https://penncapital-star.com/economy/septa-funding-crisis-could-affect-central-pennsylvanias-amtrak-service-congressman-warns/">the Pennsylvania Capital-Star reported that</a> the rail line cuts could affect Amtrak service thanks to a financial relationship between the two entities. The newsroom reported that U.S. Congressman Brendan Boyle (D., PA) said Amtrak’s CEO told him that the Keystone Service line “will cease to operate.” The line runs between Harrisburg, Philadelphia, and New York City and is heavily used, including by state policymakers.

In its official statement, Amtrak didn’t say anything about lines going away completely.

But the operator did say the impact of SEPTA’s cuts could be felt across the whole commonwealth, and possibly the whole region — not just between Harrisburg and New York — because “the potential reduction in SEPTA’s financial contribution will have a negative impact on Amtrak’s ability to reinvest in the rail network.”

A second service, the PennDOT-backed Pennsylvanian, uses the same tracks for a daily trip connecting Western Pennsylvania, including Pittsburgh, with Philadelphia and New York.

The SEPTA contribution in question is $71 million, which goes toward operating five regional rail lines on Amtrak-owned tracks: the Paoli/Thorndale, Trenton, Wilmington/Newark, Chestnut Hill West, and Cynwyd Lines.

While SEPTA’s service cuts are beginning next week, service on these regional rail lines aren’t due to be eliminated until Jan. 1.

“SEPTA does not know how the elimination of Regional Rail service on Amtrak-owned lines will impact Keystone Line service,” SEPTA spokesperson Andrew Busch said in an email. “We understand that Amtrak will have to make decisions in the coming weeks whether to pause or postpone infrastructure projects on the Keystone Line in response to the planned elimination of SEPTA’s lease payments on Jan. 1.”

{{<embed/donate>}}

State budget talks <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/08/public-transit-pennsylvania-budget-senate-pittman-shapiro-capitol/">publicly melted down in Harrisburg</a> last week over transit, with Republicans, who control the state Senate, passing a plan that would have pulled money from a capital fund to cover transit operating expenses. Democrats, who hold the state House and governorship, <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/08/pennsylvania-budget-impasse-septa-transit-funding-joe-pittman-state-senate-capitol/">summarily rejected it</a>.

The budget was due June 30. Gov. Josh Shapiro says talks are continuing, but neither chamber is due back in Harrisburg this month.

“SEPTA and PennDOT are good partners, helping to advance the current and future operation of intercity and commuter passenger rail service in the region and nation,” Amtrak’s spokesperson said in their statement. “We hope there is a path forward so SEPTA can continue providing vital transportation service and partnerships to the region.”

