+++
authors = ["Yaasmeen Piper"]
blurb = "Hear Lorene Cary discuss her ancestral odyssey \"If Sons, Then Heirs.\""
byline = "Yaasmeen Piper of Spotlight PA"
description = "Hear Lorene Cary discuss her ancestral odyssey \"If Sons, Then Heirs.\"\n\n"
draft = false
event-date = 2025-11-18T18:00:00-05:00
event-title = "If Sons, Then Heirs"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_mTN3S_hpTjGxhmRluKeEww#/registration"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/10/01mf-madq-00xz-h6k6.png"
image-caption = "Cover of 'If Sons, Then Heirs' by Lorene Cary."
image-credit = "Provided"
image-description = "Cover of 'If Sons, Then Heirs' by Lorene Cary."
internal-id = "SPLCARY1025"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-10-23T12:00:00-04:00
slug = "lorene-cary-book-club-if-sons-then-heirs-philadelphia-pennsylvania-events"
suppress-date = false
title = "WATCH: A Q&A with 'If Sons, Then Heirs' author Lorene Cary"
title-tag = "Author Lorene Cary discusses \"If Sons, Then Heirs.\""
topics = ["Events"]
+++

Violence, racial hatred, and a chance for freedom motivated millions of Black Americans to move from the south to the north. Author and playwright Lorene Cary sheds light on the largely untold history of Black land ownership, migration, and race through the eyes of the Needham family.

After the violent death of their patriarch, King, members of the Needham family migrate from South Carolina to the north. But, when his grieving widow stays behind to raise their children, the responsibility to bring their family together ultimately falls on King’s great-grandson, Rayne.

The New York Times Book Review calls <em>If Sons, Then Heirs</em> “Engaging… Bluesy and emotionally resonant.” The Philadelphia Inquirer called the novel a &#34;multilayered, complex, and engaging tale of love, social injustice, and migrations– both physical and emotional.”

As part of Spotlight PA’s new book club, Booklight PA, we read Cary’s deeply moving portrait of family legacy and discussed it with readers across the state on Discord. On Nov. 18, Cary joined us live via Zoom to answer questions about the book.

{{<youtube id="3uLmYDsxepo" loading="lazy">}}

This event is in partnership with A Novel Idea, a community-minded bookstore and event space based in East Passyunk, Philadelphia, run by Alexander Schneider and Christina Rosso-Schneider. Read more about A Novel Idea and <a href="https://anovelideaphilly.com/book-list/">purchase your books here</a>.

<strong>OTHER BOOKLIGHT PA EVENTS:</strong>

<strong>Sept. 25: </strong><em>The School for Good Mothers, </em>Jessamine Chan. <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/08/jessamine-chan-book-club-school-for-good-mothers-events/">Watch here</a>.

<strong>Oct. 23</strong>: <em>Saturnalia</em>, Stephanie Feldman. <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/09/stephanie-feldman-book-club-saturnalia-philadelphia-pennsylvania-events/">Watch here</a>.<em></em>

