+++
blurb = "A calming and satisfying pattern recognition game"
description = "Sudoku is a calming and satisfying pattern recognition game involving number placement on a grid. No math required."
draft = false
feed-exclude = true
image = "2026/05/01n0-6zvq-3dg8-vezf.png"
image-size = "hidden"
internal-id = "SPLSUDOKU0526"
kicker = "Games"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-05-12T16:00:00-04:00
slug = "sudoku-games"
suppress-ads = false
suppress-date = false
title = "Play Sudoku"
title-tag = "Play Sudoku, a daily number puzzle"
url = "/sudoku-games/"
+++

Sudoku is a fun daily number game. Fill the grid using the values 1 to 9. Each value must appear just once in every row, column, and 3x3 box. Don’t see the game below? <a href="https://app.amuselabs.com/app/date-picker?set=spotlightpa-puzzlefeed-sudoku-medium&amp;idx=1">Click here</a>. Want to play in full-screen mode? <a href="https://app.amuselabs.com/app/date-picker?set=spotlightpa-puzzlefeed-sudoku-medium&amp;idx=1">Click here</a>.

{{<embed/raw srcdoc="&lt;!-- Include the CryptoJS library for hashing the user id before sending it to the PuzzleMe server. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script src=&#34;https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/crypto-js/4.1.1/crypto-js.min.js&#34;&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Include the javascript library for embedding this puzzle. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script id=&#34;pm-script&#34; src=&#34;https://app.amuselabs.com/app/js/puzzleme-embed.js&#34;&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Specify the Amuse Labs server name from where the puzzles will be served and trigger the embed flow. --&gt;&#10;&lt;script&gt;&#10;    PM_Config.PM_BasePath = &#34;https://app.amuselabs.com/app/&#34;;&#10;&lt;/script&gt;&#10;&lt;!-- Following line embeds the picker deep linked to the latest puzzle in the series on your page. --&gt;&#10;&lt;div class=&#34;pm-embed-div&#34; data-set=&#34;spotlightpa-puzzlefeed-sudoku-medium&#34; data-page=&#34;date-picker&#34; data-embedparams=&#34;idx=1&#34; data-height=&#34;400px&#34; data-mobilemargin=&#34;10px&#34;&gt;&lt;/div&gt;">}}

Email <a href="mailto:newsletters@spotlightpa.org">newsletters@spotlightpa.org</a> about any technical issues. And thanks for playing! <strong><em></em></strong>

