+++
authors = ["Anna Kramer"]
blurb = "PJM faces extensive criticism from state leaders, who say the organization has failed to properly plan for rapidly increasing electricity demand."
byline = "Anna Kramer of NOTUS"
description = "PJM faces extensive criticism from state leaders, who say the organization has failed to properly plan for rapidly increasing electricity demand."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2023/10/01jk-592m-mkg4-rbky.jpeg"
image-credit = "Commonwealth Media Services"
image-description = "Gov. Josh Shapiro speaks from a lectern"
internal-id = "NTELECCOSTS0426"
kicker = "Josh Shapiro"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-04-16T16:22:31.561-04:00
slug = "electricity-rates-pjm-peco-josh-shapiro-power-bills"
suppress-ads = false
suppress-date = false
title = "Josh Shapiro repeats threat to pull Pa. out of regional power grid if electricity costs keep rising"
title-tag = "Shapiro criticizes grid operator over rising energy costs"
topics = ["Josh Shapiro"]
+++

<em>This article is made possible through </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><em>Spotlight PA’s</em></a><em> partnership with </em><a href="https://www.notus.org/"><em>NOTUS</em></a><em>, a nonpartisan news organization that covers government and politics with the fresh eyes of early career journalists and the expertise of veteran reporters.</em>

Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro is picking fights with the country’s largest power grid operator and the state’s biggest utility company over rising costs — and he’s already notched some wins.

In an exclusive interview with NOTUS, Shapiro doubled down on his threat to pull Pennsylvania out of PJM Interconnection, which currently serves 13 states including Pennsylvania.

“Pennsylvania is no longer going to be held captive to PJM,” Shapiro said. “We put forth some very specific proposals I wanted to see them do to reform themselves. They have not yet adopted those, and I’ve been very clear that they’re either going to adopt them or they’re going to lose Pennsylvania.”

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

Shapiro, who was at a bipartisan energy-focused meeting with other governors Thursday, declined to provide a specific deadline on his ultimatum, but said “the ball is in their court.”

PJM is facing extensive criticism from state leaders and power developers, who say that the organization has failed to properly plan for rapidly increasing electricity demand. Shapiro’s tactics show how grid operators and utility companies have become increasingly appealing targets for politicians looking for someone to blame in the developing electricity price crisis.

“The states will play a critical role in this process, particularly as it relates to the costs associated with data centers joining the grid, as PJM has no ability to allocate costs to specific customer classes,” a spokesperson for PJM told NOTUS in a statement. “PJM is a proud Pennsylvania business and we will continue our efforts to work constructively with the Governor and his staff on these important issues on behalf of the state and its residents.”

Utility companies are also facing heat. On Thursday, just after the meeting, Shapiro’s office announced that the governor convinced Pennsylvania’s largest utility to voluntarily withdraw a large planned rate hike — an exceptionally rare occurrence.

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2026/01/pennsylvania-electric-bill-harrisburg-energy-policy-environment/"><strong>&gt;&gt;&gt;READ MORE: As Pa. energy prices rise, advocates skeptical that lawmakers will put aside partisan differences</strong></a><strong></strong>

PECO, the state’s largest natural gas and electric company that serves Philadelphia and most of the surrounding counties, requested a 12.5% hike in electricity rates last week, which Shapiro <a href="https://whyy.org/articles/peco-rate-hike-request-shapiro/">called “pure greed.”</a><u></u>

On Thursday, just eight days after it announced the rate hike request, PECO withdrew its plans for the increase, <a href="https://www.peco.com/news/news-releases/2026-04-16">citing</a> “conversations with Governor Josh Shapiro” as part of the reason for changing course.

“I demanded that their CEO put customers first and withdraw their rate hike request. PECO listened,” Shapiro said in a statement announcing the withdrawal.

Shapiro also recently secured a significant political win over PJM, getting the grid operator to accept a multiple-year <a href="https://insidelines.pjm.com/pjm-files-price-collar-expedited-interconnection-as-part-of-large-load-plan/">upper limit cap </a>on certain power prices. On Thursday, he made clear that victory wasn’t enough to get him to ease pressure on the grid operator.

Overall wholesale electricity costs within PJM’s district climbed about 56% in the last year.

“I don’t think that they’re built as an organization to be able to do the kind of generation we need,” Shapiro told NOTUS.

Across the board, the Republican and Democratic governors at Thursday’s gathering were more in lockstep on electricity price issues than members of Congress have been in D.C.

New Jersey Gov. Mikie Sherrill took multiple opportunities to bash PJM, calling them “a very bad grid operator” and “asleep at the wheel.”

{{<embed/donate>}}

And Oklahoma Gov. Kevin Stitt, the Republican chair of the National Governors’ Association, repeatedly emphasized his agreement with Shapiro and other Democrats about the importance of permitting reform, which they say would accelerate construction of new sources of power generation and transmission. He said that the reform should apply to all sources of energy, including renewables.

“I know that Shapiro wants it. I know that the governors want it. So boom, get it done,” Stitt said to NOTUS after the event.

But bipartisan agreement at the state level doesn’t go far in D.C. It’s been nearly impossible to get permitting reform done in Congress, where negotiations in the Senate have started and stopped repeatedly. Democrats <a href="https://www.energy.senate.gov/2026/3/heinrich-and-whitehouse-joint-statement-on-permitting-reform">returned to the permitting negotiation table last month</a> after securing public support from Republicans that previously approved projects shouldn’t be canceled or delayed.

The fate of those negotiations will eventually rest with President Donald Trump, whose administration <a href="https://www.notus.org/energy/trump-administration-missed-deadline-congress-energy-projects-report">continues to stall </a>the permitting process for wind and solar projects.

PJM did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

