+++
authors = ["Anna Kramer"]
blurb = "Shapiro traveled to Washington to sign a document with Trump administration officials urging significant changes to the way that the grid is managed for 13 mid-Atlantic and Midwestern states."
byline = "Anna Kramer of NOTUS"
description = "Shapiro traveled to Washington to sign a document with Trump administration officials urging significant changes to the way that the grid is managed for 13 mid-Atlantic and Midwestern states."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2026/01/01mp-mvfg-nz08-03wy.jpeg"
image-credit = "Alex Brandon / AP"
image-description = "President Donald Trump speaks during an event to promote investment in rural health care in the East Room of the White House, Friday, Jan. 16, 2026, in Washington."
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "NTWHSHAP0126"
kicker = "Federal Government"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-01-16T12:54:50.866-05:00
slug = "shapiro-trump-electricity-prices-data-centers-pjm-federal-government"
suppress-date = false
title = "Shapiro backs plan with Trump admin to slow rising electricity prices amid data center surge"
title-tag = "Shapiro backs plan with Trump admin to slow rising electricity prices"
topics = ["Josh Shapiro", "Environment", "Federal Government"]
+++

<em>This article is made possible through </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><em>Spotlight PA’s</em></a><em> partnership with </em><a href="https://www.notus.org/"><em>NOTUS</em></a><em>, a nonpartisan news organization that covers government and politics with the fresh eyes of early career journalists and the expertise of veteran reporters.</em>

Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro and Maryland Gov. Wes Moore — both possible 2028 Democratic presidential candidates — endorsed a plan with the Trump administration on Friday to try to slow electricity price increases in the nation’s largest grid region.

The two governors, alongside Republicans including Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine, traveled to Washington to sign a document with Trump administration officials urging significant changes to the way that the grid is managed for 13 mid-Atlantic and Midwestern states.

Over the past two years, the grid region known as PJM has experienced an unusual upswing in electricity prices largely attributed to rising power demand from data centers. As a result, electricity prices have become a mainstream political issue in the region and even featured prominently in the 2025 governor’s races in New Jersey and Virginia.

<strong><em>&gt;&gt;READ MORE: </em></strong><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2026/01/data-centers-pennsylvania-debate-legislature-environment-environment/"><strong><em>Many Pa. residents don’t want data centers in their communities. State leaders are welcoming them.</em></strong></a><strong><em></em></strong>

The Trump administration, which has embraced artificial intelligence and data centers wholeheartedly, is now trying to head off a growing political problem, with Americans <a href="http://pro.morningconsult.com/analysis/ai-data-center-energy-prices-november-2025">increasingly blaming data centers and tech companies</a> for the rising prices. “I never want Americans to pay higher electricity bills because of data centers,” Trump said Monday in a Truth Social post.

Energy Secretary Chris Wright on Thursday blamed rising electricity prices on Democratic states that endorse emissions-reductions goals and tried to shift the blame away from data centers. “Data centers are not the problem. They’re the answer,” he said at an energy-industry conference.

Friday’s agreement, which included two key proposals designed to force tech companies to pay for their share of electricity costs and keep electricity costs from spiking too quickly for consumers, appeared intended to partially address that political problem and drew measured praise from grid experts.

One of the two core pieces of the proposal is a plan to keep a price cap in place on future PJM auctions for a type of electricity generation known as capacity, which is used to ensure that enough power will be available to prevent blackouts in times of high demand.

Shapiro essentially forced PJM to accept a price cap in a legal settlement last January, and his participation in Friday’s meeting with the White House was contingent on Trump administration officials supporting an extension of that price cap, a Shapiro aide told NOTUS.

“If implemented, the price cap sought by Shapiro would save consumers in the PJM grid up to $27 billion in future energy costs over the next several years,” the governor’s office said in a statement.

The White House proposed a meeting, document-signing and endorsement of Shapiro’s price cap all in the last week, sending the Shapiro administration scrambling to assess the plan and agree to endorse it, according to the Shapiro aide. The governor’s office, which has been aggressive in addressing electricity price issues in Pennsylvania, has had ongoing dialogue with Trump administration officials for months but had not prepared for a commitment to move so quickly, the aide said.

The second proposal is a one-time auction for technology companies to allow them to bid on new, 15-year contracts for power generation in the region, a highly unusual setup compared to the standard one-year auctions that involve all power generators. This design has the potential to solve multiple problems: it would force tech companies to make commitments about their power needs in the region (creating some clarity about data center demand), and it would ensure that the costs for new data centers are borne by the companies creating them instead of the average residential electricity consumer.

This part of the proposal was a White House initiative, not a Shapiro team idea, according to the Shapiro aide. The text of the “statement of principles” was not immediately available.

“Under President Trump’s leadership, the administration is leading a unprecedented bi-partisan effort urging PJM to fix the energy subtraction failures of the past, prevent price increases, and reduce the risk of blackouts,” said Taylor Rogers, a White House spokesperson.

PJM was not invited to the meeting, <a href="https://finance.yahoo.com/news/trump-moves-tech-giants-pay-023341234.html?guccounter=1&amp;guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&amp;guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAI23SVCjSty-yfp2C5WzKP8QBWuFJjq0AqoXRofe1NcanCMb8WiA3zYF-AJ3Eb2RDOg_1kSRtEh3M43xHxSkDe0BC4EL8fPx5GqDKmcUoX5_TfzHn3fHAhpYqf-OGHDaokWEVX3gcU_ISLdVtRTxswKcPnWZFn8JKYhZJxIIoh1i">according to a spokesperson.</a>

Even without their involvement Friday, the agreement between the White House and the governors could apply enough pressure that PJM could be forced to consider adopting the proposals. PJM needs large states like Pennsylvania and Maryland to participate, and Shapiro <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/10/electricity-prices-shapiro-grid-operator-pjm-data-centers-environment/#:~:text=14%2C%202025,the%20feds%20%E2%80%94%20are%20more%20feasible.">already threatened once</a> to pull his state out of the grid operator. And the White House has already been exerting pressure on PJM through the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or FERC.

“It’s bold. I want to see more details, but from what I know so far the data centers should embrace it,” said Neil Chatterjee, a former Republican commissioner at FERC. “They will pay their fair share. This brings PJM in line with regulated states on this, addresses affordability and helps solve for capacity. I suspect there will be close to unanimous support amongst Republican and Democrat governors. It’s short term but significant.”

Jeff Dennis, the executive director of the Electricity Customers Alliance and a former Department of Energy official, cautioned that Friday’s plan only appears to address one piece of a complex puzzle contributing to increasing electricity prices.

“I would note that a lot of the electricity price challenges and supply constraints in PJM are related to factors outside the capacity auction that are slowing new generation construction, including lack of long-distance transmission capacity to deliver new generation to customers, along with siting and permitting roadblocks. So there are more pieces to the affordability puzzle still to be placed,” he said.<strong></strong>

