+++
authors = ["Sam Fortier", "Torrie Herrington", "Jenna Monnin"]
blurb = "At least six states have confirmed they don’t plan to send a delegation to the Great American State Fair, a birthday bash organized by the president."
byline = "Sam Fortier, Torrie Herrington, and Jenna Monnin of NOTUS"
description = "At least six states have confirmed they don’t plan to send a delegation to the Great American State Fair, a birthday bash organized by the president."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2026/06/01n2-njmp-c4k9-pcvq.jpeg"
image-credit = "Lillian Bautista / NOTUS"
image-description = "The National Mall ahead of the Great American State Fair"
internal-id = "NTSTATEFAIR0626"
kicker = "Federal Government"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-06-11T10:50:05.564-04:00
slug = "trump-great-american-state-fair-pennsylvania-federal-government"
suppress-ads = false
suppress-date = false
title = "Pa. among states uncommitted to Trump fair celebrating nation’s 250th anniversary"
title-tag = "Will PA participate in the Trump state fair?"
topics = ["Federal Government"]
+++

<em>This article is made possible through </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><em>Spotlight PA’s</em></a><em> partnership with </em><a href="https://www.notus.org/"><em>NOTUS</em></a><em>, a nonpartisan news organization that covers government and politics with the fresh eyes of early career journalists and the expertise of veteran reporters.</em>

President Donald Trump’s big birthday bash for America is hitting more speedbumps, as at least six states plan to sit out the Great American State Fair.

Days after an <a href="https://www.notus.org/trump-white-house/music-acts-exit-trump-state-fair">exodus</a> of musical acts, officials from Connecticut, Illinois, Maine, Massachusetts, North Carolina and Oregon told NOTUS they won’t officially send a delegation to the 16-day fair, one of the most high-profile celebrations of the nation’s 250th birthday this summer.

At least three other states — Maryland, Pennsylvania and Washington — remain uncommitted just two weeks before the fair is scheduled to open June 25 on the National Mall.

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

The fair is just one example of how participants involved in the 250th celebrations are stuck in a confusing battle between two organizations over the funding and ideology for the nation’s birthday party.

America 250, the bipartisan commission created by Congress a decade ago, has a decentralized mandate focused on educational and volunteer programming. Freedom 250, which the Trump administration created late last year, is planning massive entertainment spectacles including the fair, an Ultimate Fighting Championship bout and an IndyCar race, as well as what the White House called “an unprecedented gathering of tall ships” in New York Harbor.

Rachel Reisner, a spokesperson for Freedom 250, said ultimately “all 50 states and U.S. territories will be represented.”

“We are actively finalizing the details for several states right now, and we look forward to sharing the full picture very soon — the response has been incredible and we couldn’t be more energized by what’s coming together,” Reisner said in a statement. “Whether represented by a governor’s office, a tourism board, or a beloved state company or organization, every community will be celebrated, and every American will see themselves in this once-in-a-generation event.”

Illinois will be represented by the Peoria Riverfront Museum, a spokesperson in the state said. Illinois does not know how or why Freedom 250 chose the Peoria museum, according to Natalie Boscia, the vice president of PR for Enjoy Illinois.

“I’m sorry, but that’s the extent of what we know about this event. We don’t have any further information regarding who contacted them,” Boscia said.

A spokesperson in North Carolina said they didn’t have any information on who would staff their booth. Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, and Oregon did not respond to follow up questions about any alternative plans for the fair.

The goals of Freedom 250 and America 250 have frequently conflicted. The Trump administration is <a href="https://www.notus.org/trump-white-house/america-250-shortfall-freedom-250-interior-funds">withholding</a> tens of millions of dollars from America 250, which says it now faces a $100 million shortfall, and has simultaneously funneled at least $68 million to Freedom 250. Freedom 250 did not answer questions from NOTUS about which events those dollars are funding. This diversion of public funds has sparked <a href="https://www.schiff.senate.gov/wp-content/uploads/2026/03/ABS-Letter-to-DOI-on-Freedom-250___.pdf">congressional scrutiny</a> and a watchdog <a href="https://peer.org/wp-content/uploads/2026/05/5_11_26-PEER-v-DOI-FOIA-suit-2026-final.pdf">lawsuit</a>, with critics accusing Freedom 250 of commercializing the historic milestone and prioritizing partisan, big-donor access.

After America 250 “decided not to host large scale events,” Reisner said, Freedom 250 reached out to all governors about the fair on Feb. 2.

Two officials from states that plan to attend, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retribution, said they were not given adequate time to prepare and are concerned about staffing their booths for 11 to 13 hours per day.

“There was a shorter turnaround time than ideal, but Freedom 250 has been working around the clock to put together events that celebrate America’s huge milestone!” Reisner said in a statement.

States officials were also concerned about potential politicization of the event. After the musical acts dropped out, Trump announced on social media that he would instead open the fair with “the Greatest Rally, EVER!”

“The idea that a president’s presence at America’s 250th birthday is somehow a political act is not a serious argument — and frankly, it is not serious journalism to treat it as one,” Reisner said in a statement.

Massachusetts Gov. Maura Healey, a Democrat, hinted at the cracks between states and the federal government last week.

When a local radio host <a href="https://www.youtube.com/live/oYI5usIBEqQ?si=AONWN70vwEFXxqmU">asked</a> if Trump would be welcome at the state’s 250th celebrations, Healey shot back: “He’s too busy with his Great American State Fair down there that everybody’s bailing on.”

“This guy finds a way to try to get money into his own pocket any which way,” she continued. “Great American Fair — he invited all the states to participate and wants to charge us — charge us! — to put something on his exhibit, whatever he’s creating for Freedom 250. It’s just ridiculous. This is taxpayer money.”

“Freedom 250 is not charging states to participate,” Reisner said.

Healey’s office did not respond to a request to clarify her comments.

Most state officials were tight-lipped about their deliberations over whether to attend.

“This is not the hill we want to die on,” one official said on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.

North Carolina — so far the only state skipping the fair that went for Trump in 2024 — would have to spend at least $100,000 to prepare the exhibition space and arrange staff travel and accommodations for 16 days, according to Michele Walker, the assistant communications director for the state’s natural and cultural resources department.

“We decided early in the process that we do not have the capacity to participate,” Walker wrote in an email, adding that “our limited resources are focused on America 250 events across North Carolina.”

Many participating states described plans for their roughly 600-square-foot booths in sweeping generalities, saying their engaging, interactive experiences would highlight qualities that made their states stand out.

Florida might bring an airboat. West Virginia has a “Country Roads-themed booth in the works.”

“While details on Texas’ pavilion and exhibits are still being finalized, visitors can expect a dynamic showcase highlighting why Texas is both a premier travel destination and a national leader in opportunity, innovation, and freedom,” Andrew Mahaleris, Gov. Greg Abbott’s press secretary, said in a statement.

Indiana will have mini golf. New York will have a sculpture of the “I LOVE NY” logo. Nevada will invite guests to stand under the “Welcome to Fabulous Las Vegas” sign. South Carolina will have a putting green, postcards and cornhole. Oklahoma will create “a prairie-inspired air flow” to mimic the wind sweeping the plains (no tumbleweeds, though). South Dakota will tell the story of Sue the Tyrannosaurus rex and offer virtual-reality pheasant hunting.

The most detailed plans came from Wyoming, which described its theme as “The Way America Used to Be.” The booth is slated to include a virtual-reality rodeo, ranching and farming exhibits, and “hands-on Western heritage experiences, including learning how to rope cattle, shape cowboy hats, spin wool, and brand leather.”

{{<embed/donate>}}

“Our pavilion will also be an immersive Western experience with our representatives in Western Americana attire, which, while it might stand out a bit in D.C., is authentically how many of us dress in Wyoming,” Courtny Hinds, the general manager of the Wyoming State Fair, wrote in an email. “We want visitors to walk away with a greater appreciation for the values, traditions, landscapes, industries, and people that continue to define our state today, and to want to plan a visit to Wyoming!”

Amy Blackburn, the executive director of Oklahoma’s department of tourism and recreation, said the fair offers overlooked states like hers an opportunity to tell the public a new story about all it has to offer.

“We are kind of overcoming a stigma,” she said. “A lot of people still think of us as ‘Grapes of Wrath’ and dust bowl — and that is not the Oklahoma that you’ll experience today. We are lively, bold and an incredibly welcoming and friendly state.”

“We’re just really excited to be part of the Great American State Fair.”

