+++
authors = ["Yaasmeen Piper"]
blurb = "As part of our book club, read “Shut Up and Read,” then discuss it with the author on March 26."
byline = "Yaasmeen Piper of Spotlight PA"
description = "Harriett’s Bookshop founder Jeannine Cook joins Booklight PA for a virtual discussion about her memoir and how she found purpose in Philadelphia."
draft = false
event-date = 2026-03-26T18:00:00-04:00
event-title = "Shut Up and Read"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_B8NFE11DQvyOTPLV_J10Vw#/registration"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2026/02/01ms-h7za-e10n-1ang.png"
image-credit = "Provided"
internal-id = "SPLCOOKBOOK0226"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-02-17T17:00:00-05:00
slug = "jeannine-cook-shut-up-and-read-book-club-philadelphia-pennsylvania-events"
suppress-date = false
title = "Booklight PA: Explore the creation of beloved Harriett’s Bookshop in ‘Shut Up and Read’"
title-tag = "Founder of Harriett’s Bookshop in Philly shares her story"
topics = ["Events"]
+++

“Shut Up and Read” is not just a saying for Jeannine Cook. It’s an affirmation, a prayer, and the title of her new memoir. <em>Shut Up and Read</em> follows Cook’s life from being raised by a blind librarian, to fleeing abuse and creating the iconic Harriett’s Bookshop in Philadelphia. Cook writes about how she found her purpose, community, and survived the COVID-19 pandemic when many shops could not.

Join Booklight PA in reading the memoir then discuss it with Cook on <strong>Thursday, March 26 at 6 p.m. via Zoom.</strong> <strong></strong>

<em>This event is in partnership with A Novel Idea, a community-minded bookstore and event space in East Passyunk, Philadelphia, run by Alexander Schneider and Christina Rosso-Schneider. Read more about A Novel Idea and </em><a href="https://anovelideaphilly.com/"><em>purchase your books here</em></a><strong><em>.</em></strong>

Register and submit your questions for the reporters <a href="https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_B8NFE11DQvyOTPLV_J10Vw#/registration">here</a>. Stay up to date with all our book club info by joining our <a href="https://fable.co/club/booklight-pa-with-spotlight-pa-165117408198?referralID=ZuDHBaWpNg">Fable</a> and <a href="https://discord.gg/Srnev4Fa8K">Discord.</a>

Want to help us spread the word about our book club and this event? Print <a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1aaltF_3dZXUZwNsLUxs2oi5mOKn5hVw4/view?usp=sharing">this flyer</a> and hang it in your local library or bookstore —&nbsp;with permission, of course.

<strong>Upcoming Booklight PA events:</strong>

<strong>April 30:</strong> <em>Sidle Creek</em> with author Jolene McIlwain

Test your knowledge of the state’s most iconic Black authors, artists, and Black-owned bookshops in the seven question quiz below. (Not seeing anything below? <a href="https://hsqxo6lncmz.typeform.com/to/T8sLpeH5">Click here</a>.) <em></em>

{{<typeform id="01KKYA5FX34ZYAST59PDSXPB4Q" >}}

