+++
authors = ["Danielle Ohl"]
blurb = "We want to hear about your frustrations and your successes, your stories of resilience or resignation with Pa.’s mental health system."
byline = "Danielle Ohl of Spotlight PA"
description = "Learn more about Spotlight PA’s planned event to empower people to share their experiences with the mental health system."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/07/01m7-k02e-2fg9-bdj8.png"
image-credit = "Nate Smallwood / For Spotlight PA"
image-description = "A photo of a notebook, paper, a cross, and sobriety chips."
internal-id = "SPLMHSURVEY0326"
kicker = "Health"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-03-19T04:00:00-04:00
series = ["The Cost of Failing"]
slug = "pennsylvania-mental-health-survey-event"
suppress-date = false
title = "Tell Spotlight PA your experiences with Pennsylvania’s mental health system"
title-tag = "Share your stories about PA’s mental health system"
topics = ["Health"]
+++

<em>This series and event are supported by the Pulitzer Center.</em>

Do you have a story about Pennsylvania’s mental health care system? Spotlight PA wants to hear from you.

I spent two years investigating Pennsylvania’s mental health system, digging into how the state failed to keep its promise of better care for thousands of residents with serious conditions.

Over the course of the reporting, I heard countless stories of struggle within the system — from parents, siblings, patients, social workers, and health care providers — far more than I could include in what we published.

Now we want to give readers the chance to tell their stories directly.

Spotlight PA is planning a storytelling event where we hope to empower people to share their own experience with the mental health system, whether in person, through written word, or recorded video or audio.

We want to hear about your frustrations and your successes, your stories of resilience or resignation.

If you’d like to share, and potentially participate in the event, please fill out the form below.

{{<embed/raw srcdoc="&lt;iframe src=&#34;https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf2sdy0GihXXb-oy3hiW-VSfKpf12O1_IOn3uds5Wt03R-_Lg/viewform?embedded=true&#34; width=&#34;640&#34; height=&#34;2559&#34; frameborder=&#34;0&#34; marginheight=&#34;0&#34; marginwidth=&#34;0&#34;&gt;Loading…&lt;/iframe&gt;">}}

