+++
authors = ["Associated Press"]
blurb = "The child was never inside the wolf habitat at the ZooAmerica North American Wildlife Park, which is part of Hersheypark, and the officials characterized the injuries as minor without elaborating."
byline = "Associated Press"
description = "The child was never inside the wolf habitat at the ZooAmerica North American Wildlife Park, which is part of Hersheypark, and the officials characterized the injuries as minor without elaborating."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2026/04/01mx-7m2z-kj04-syzz.png"
image-credit = "Screenshot via ABC27"
image-description = "The wolf habitat at ZooAmerica in Hershey, PA."
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "APWOLFTODD0426"
kicker = "Justice System"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-04-06T11:26:28.131-04:00
slug = "wolf-toddler-pennsylvania-zoo-hersheypark-justice-system"
suppress-date = false
title = "Toddler injured by wolf after crawling under Pennsylvania zoo's exterior metal fence"
title-tag = "‘Unsupervised’ toddler injured by wolf at Hersheypark zoo"
topics = ["Justice System"]
+++

HERSHEY — A toddler was lightly injured by a wolf at a Pennsylvania theme park zoo after he crawled under a fence and stuck his hand into the animal’s enclosure, officials at the zoo confirmed Sunday.

The child was never inside the wolf habitat at the ZooAmerica North American Wildlife Park, which is part of the <a href="https://apnews.com/general-news-travel-c6b18ccccd7b4637a9b0b55d1a218c42">Hersheypark theme park</a>, and the officials characterized the injuries as minor without elaborating.

After the “unsupervised” child reached the metal enclosure around the wolf habitat on Saturday morning and put his hand through, a wolf approached “and made contact with the child’s hand,” according to a statement from the zoo.

{{<embed/newsletter>}}

“This type of response is consistent with natural animal behavior, and was not a sign of aggression,” the zoo said in a statement. “Our habitats are designed with multiple layers of protection, and clear signage and barriers are in place to help ensure safe viewing. Guests are expected to remain within designated areas and closely supervise children at all times.”

The zoo is part of the entertainment complex in Hershey, Pennsylvania, featuring a chocolate-themed amusement park. The zoo&#39;s <a href="https://www.zooamerica.com/animals/gray-wolf/">website</a> says it has three gray wolves.

Hersheypark made headlines last summer when a lost boy wandering a monorail line above a crowd was <a href="https://apnews.com/article/hershey-hersheypark-monorail-boy-497d0ea7a2eb2766328e63631126b179">rescued</a> by a park visitor who climbed onto a building and jumped onto the rails. The child was unharmed and reunited with his family.

