+++
authors = ["Associated Press"]
blurb = "The city of Philadelphia sued in January after the National Park Service removed the explanatory panels from Independence National Historical Park."
byline = "Associated Press"
description = "The city of Philadelphia sued in January after the National Park Service removed the explanatory panels from Independence National Historical Park."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2026/01/01mq-7fh6-zcbx-bfh1.jpeg"
image-credit = "Matt Rourke / AP"
image-description = "People walk past locations of the now removed explanatory panels that were part of an exhibit on slavery."
internal-id = "APWASH0226"
kicker = "Federal Government"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2026-02-17T10:12:11.821-05:00
slug = "trump-washington-slavery-exhibit-philadelphia-court-order-federal-government"
suppress-date = false
title = "Trump administration ordered to restore George Washington slavery exhibit it removed in Philadelphia"
title-tag = "Trump ordered to restore Washington slavery exhibit removed"
topics = ["Federal Government"]
+++

HARRISBURG — An exhibit about nine people enslaved by George Washington must be restored at his former home in Philadelphia after President Donald Trump’s administration <a href="https://apnews.com/video/us-park-staff-remove-slavery-exhibit-at-independence-national-historical-park-8e2f00250580483d9ad7a747ad419c6c">took it down last month</a>, a federal judge ruled on Presidents Day, the federal holiday honoring Washington&#39;s legacy.

The city of Philadelphia <a href="https://apnews.com/article/slavery-exhibit-removed-philadelphia-trump-executive-order-dd764277133f47ec1173e8dc16703958">sued in January</a> after the National Park Service removed the explanatory panels from Independence National Historical Park, the site where George and Martha Washington lived with nine of their slaves in the 1790s, when Philadelphia was briefly the nation’s capital.

The removal came in response to a Trump <a href="https://apnews.com/article/trump-national-park-service-disparaging-d861b3c902ef68b0184c2bd776f707e4">executive order</a> “restoring truth and sanity to American history” at the nation’s museums, parks, and landmarks. It directed the Interior Department to ensure those sites do not display elements that “inappropriately disparage Americans past or living.”

U.S. District Judge Cynthia Rufe ruled Monday that all materials must be restored in their original condition while a lawsuit challenging the removal&#39;s legality plays out. She prohibited Trump officials from installing replacements that explain the history differently.

Rufe, an appointee of Republican President George W. Bush, began her written order with a quote from George Orwell’s dystopian novel “1984” and compared the Trump administration to the book&#39;s totalitarian regime called the Ministry of Truth, which revised historical records to align with its own narrative.

{{<youtube id="LEMfJk5IEvQ" loading="lazy">}}

“As if the Ministry of Truth in George Orwell’s 1984 now existed, with its motto ‘Ignorance is Strength,’ this Court is now asked to determine whether the federal government has the power it claims — to dissemble and disassemble historical truths when it has some domain over historical facts,&#34; Rufe wrote. “It does not.”

She had warned Justice Department lawyers during a January hearing that they were making “dangerous” and “horrifying” statements when they said Trump officials can choose which parts of U.S. history to display at National Park Service sites.

The Interior Department did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the ruling, which came while government offices were closed for the federal holiday.

The judge did not provide a timeline for when the exhibit must be restored. Federal officials can appeal the ruling.

The historical site is among several where the administration has quietly removed content about the history of enslaved people, LGBTQ\+ people, and Native Americans.

Signage that has disappeared from Grand Canyon National Park said settlers pushed Native American tribes “off their land” for the park to be established and “exploited” the landscape for mining and grazing.

Last week, a <a href="https://apnews.com/article/stonewall-monument-rainbow-flag-removed-e58b12c1c9482e4b2cf02fef55e0f775">rainbow flag was taken down</a> at the Stonewall National Monument, where bar patrons rebelled against a police raid and catalyzed <a href="https://apnews.com/article/us-news-ap-top-news-pa-state-wire-new-york-ny-state-wire-5f2159a5120e4833b31683665f9405ca">the modern LGBTQ\+ rights movement</a>. The administration has also removed references to transgender people from its webpage about the monument, despite several trans women of color being key figures in the uprising.

The Philadelphia exhibit, created two decades ago in a partnership between the city and federal officials, included biographical details about each of the nine people enslaved by the Washingtons at the home, including two who escaped.

Among them was Oney Judge, who was born into slavery at the family’s plantation in Mount Vernon, Virginia, and later escaped from their Philadelphia house in 1796. Judge fled north to New Hampshire, a free state, while Washington had her declared a fugitive and published advertisements seeking her return.

Because Judge had escaped from the Philadelphia house, the <a href="https://apnews.com/hub/national-park-service">National Park Service</a> in 2022 added it to a national network of Underground Railroad sites where the agency pledged to “honor, preserve, and promote the history of resistance to enslavement through escape and flight.&#34;

Rufe said the removal of materials about Judge “conceals crucial information linking the site&#34; to the network.

Only the names of Judge and the other eight enslaved people — Austin, Paris, Hercules, Richmond, Giles, Moll and Joe, who each had a single name, and Christopher Sheels — remained engraved in a cement wall after federal employees took a crowbar to the plaques on Jan. 22.

Hercules also escaped in 1797 after he was brought to Mount Vernon, where the Washingtons had many other slaves. He reached New York City despite being declared a fugitive slave and lived under the name Hercules Posey.

Several local politicians and Black community leaders celebrated the ruling, which came while many were out rallying at the site for its restoration.

State Rep. Malcolm Kenyatta, a Philadelphia Democrat, said the community prevailed against an attempt by the Trump administration to “whitewash our history.”

“Philadelphians fought back, and I could not be more proud of how we stood together,” he said.

