+++
authors = ["Marley Parish"]
blurb = "Residents in Lycoming, Potter, Tioga, and Union counties can apply for federal aid."
byline = "Marley Parish of Spotlight PA State College"
description = "Residents in Lycoming, Potter, Tioga, and Union counties can apply for $1.3M in federal aid to cover damages from Tropical Storm Debby. Learn how to apply."
feed-exclude = false
image = "2024/10/01kg-dg5w-4gge-mr8c.jpeg"
image-credit = "Nicholas Monteleone / FEMA"
image-description = "Disaster Survivor Assistance teams speaking with a disaster survivor in Tioga County"
image-gravity = "ea"
internal-id = "SPLFEMA1024"
kicker = "Rural Issues"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "How to apply for FEMA aid to cover Tropical Storm Debby damages"
pinned = false
published = 2024-10-10T12:00:00-04:00
slug = "pennsylvania-tropical-storm-debby-fema-disaster-relief-potter-lycoming-union-tioga"
suppress-date = false
title = "More than $1M is available for rural Pa. counties hit hard by Tropical Storm Debby. Here’s how to apply."
title-tag = "FEMA aid for PA counties hit by Debby: how to apply"
topics = ["Rural Issues"]
twitter-title = "How to apply for FEMA aid to cover Tropical Storm Debby damages"
+++

BELLEFONTE — More than $1 million in aid is available to people in four rural Pennsylvania counties hit hard by the remnants of Tropical Storm Debby.

Heavy rains and floods devastated parts of Lycoming, Potter, Tioga, and Union Counties in early August. The Federal Emergency Management Agency has approved <a href="https://www.fema.gov/press-release/20240923/disaster-assistance-pennsylvania-survivors-tropical-storm-debby-tops-1">$1.3 million</a> to help those displaced or otherwise affected by the storm.

As of Oct. 7, the federal agency has received 960 requests for assistance from Pennsylvanians. The deadline to apply for individual assistance is Nov. 12. So far, Tioga County residents have submitted the most requests, totaling 403.

{{<embed/newsletter button="Sign Up Now" cta="Sign up for our regional newsletter, &lt;b&gt;Talk of the Town&lt;/b&gt;, and get all the news and notes from State College and north-central PA." eyebrow="DON&#39;T MISS A BEAT" preselect="state_college">}}

Westfield Borough in northwestern Tioga County reported downed trees and flash flooding that left water in homes and businesses and residences without power.

Westfield Borough Mayor Faun James said she had nearly six feet of water in her basement and lost her hot water tank. Damages to the borough’s office floors due to flooding are estimated at $300,000, an amount that does not account for equipment used during the emergency, she told Spotlight PA.

In the days after the storm, neighbors pitched in to help clean up and ensure everyone had food and water, but some residents are still working on home repairs, James said.

Here’s what to know about applying for individual aid ahead of the Nov. 12 deadline:

## Who can apply for aid — and what does it cover?

Lycoming, Potter, Tioga, and Union County residents can apply for federal assistance to help with costs from damage and losses caused by Tropical Storm Debby from Aug. 9 to 10.

The funds <a href="https://www.media.pa.gov/pages/pema-details.aspx?newsid=279">could help pay for</a> temporary housing, home repairs, and low-cost loans to cover uninsured property losses.

If you have insurance, file a claim as soon as possible because the agency won’t pay for losses covered by insurance.

## Where do I apply?

- Online at <a href="http://www.disasterassistance.gov/">disasterassistance.gov</a>.

- Download the <a href="https://www.fema.gov/about/news-multimedia/mobile-products">FEMA app</a>.

- Call the federal agency’s helpline at 1-800-621-3362 between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m.

- At a <a href="https://egateway.fema.gov/ESF6/DRCLocator">disaster recovery center</a>:

- <strong>Lycoming County:</strong> Hepburn Township Volunteer Fire Company, 615 East Rt. 973, Cogan Station

- <strong>Potter County:</strong> Penn-York Retreat Center, 266 Northern Potter Rd, Ulysses

- <strong>Tioga County:</strong> Valley Christian Church, 146 Maple St., Westfield

Union County’s disaster recovery center has closed.

{{<embed/donate>}}

## I submitted my application. What happens next?

You can check your application status online by creating an account at <a href="http://www.disasterassistance.gov/">disasterassistance.gov</a>, through the app, by calling the helpline, or at a disaster recovery center.

After you apply for aid, the agency will verify your claim through an inspection within 10 days. Staff also might contact you by phone to further discuss the damage.

Once the agency reviews your application, the inspection results, and any documentation submitted as part of the review, you’ll get a letter — either by mail or digitally — explaining whether the request is approved, for how much aid, how it’s to be spent, and how to appeal.

## What if my application is denied?

If the agency denies your application, you can appeal. However, challenges to decisions must be submitted within 60 days of the date on your decision letter.

The agency will provide more information on the types of documents or information — such as receipts, bills, or repair estimates — you must provide if you decide to submit an appeal.

<strong><em>SUPPORT THIS JOURNALISM </em></strong><em>and help us reinvigorate local news in north-central Pennsylvania at </em><a href="http://spotlightpa.org/donate/statecollege"><em>spotlightpa.org/donate/statecollege</em></a><em>. Spotlight PA is funded by </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/support"><em>foundations and readers like you</em></a><em> who are committed to accountability and public-service journalism that gets results.</em>

