+++
blurb = "On Jan. 23, Spotlight PA held a live event about our coverage of Penn State."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "On Jan. 23, Spotlight PA held a live event about our coverage of Penn State."
draft = false
event-date = 2025-01-23T18:00:00-05:00
event-title = "HOW WE REPORT: An inside look at our coverage of Penn State"
event-url = "https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_eBhM9N_7RR-dH8IdGEDhyg#/registration"
feed-exclude = false
image = "2023/09/01jg-6j4c-gy32-4xzp.jpeg"
image-credit = "Georgianna Sutherland / For Spotlight PA"
image-description = "Old Main on Penn State's University Park campus in State College, Pennsylvania"
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "SPLPSUEVENT0125"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "Learn how we hold Penn State accountable"
pinned = false
published = 2025-01-08T11:33:37.283-05:00
slug = "penn-state-trustees-misconduct-health-investigations-pennsylvania-public-university"
suppress-date = false
title = "WATCH: An inside look at our coverage of Penn State"
title-tag = "Learn how we hold Penn State accountable"
topics = ["Events"]
twitter-title = "Learn how we hold Penn State accountable"
+++

Spotlight PA’s Wyatt Massey is the only full-time investigative reporter dedicated to covering Penn State, the largest and most influential university in Pennsylvania. Massey’s reporting provides deeper insight into the university and its leadership, holds the powerful to account, and informs employees and community members alike about the largely closed-door institution.

Massey has revealed deep-rooted flaws in the university’s misconduct reporting apparatus and potentially serious problems in its health system. He’s used data analysis to highlight trends in university spending, and board of trustees’ actions. Behind the stories are often hours and hours of work combing through data, making records requests that might go unanswered, talking to sources, and much more.

In 2023, Penn State filed a lawsuit to block the release of records Massey requested. The case is ongoing. Spotlight PA, in partnership with the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, has a case ongoing against the university’s board of trustees over alleged violations of Pennsylvania’s open meetings law.

On Jan. 23, Massey joined Melissa Melewsky, media law counsel for Pennsylvania NewsMedia Association, in conversation to discuss his coverage of Penn State.

{{<youtube id="NbCNZNIMWdQ" loading="lazy">}}

<strong>» Spotlight PA’s events operate on a “pay-what-you-can” honor system.</strong> If you value this public-service event, pay it forward and contribute any amount to Spotlight PA now so we can keep our programming free for everyone: <a href="http://spotlightpa.org/donate"><strong>spotlightpa.org/donate</strong></a>.

