+++
blurb = "For the third year, the “Clink and Think” Quiz Bash Fundraiser was a success at Axemann Brewery in Bellefonte."
byline = "Spotlight PA Staff"
description = "Centre County-themed trivia fundraiser, hosted by 99.5 The Bus’ Jeff Brown, supports investigative and public-service journalism."
draft = false
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/11/01mg-wax3-6d7q-88e7.jpeg"
image-credit = "Georgianna Sutherland / For Spotlight PA"
image-description = "The winning trivia team celebrates at the third annual “Clink and Think” Quiz Bash Fundraiser on Oct. 26, 2025, at Axemann Brewery in Bellefonte."
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "SPLQUIZBASH1125"
kicker = "Events"
modal-exclude = false
pinned = false
published = 2025-11-11T04:00:00-05:00
slug = "spotlight-pennsylvania-state-college-quiz-bash-axemann-brewery-2025-events"
suppress-date = false
title = "Centre County trivia event raises $17,000 for Spotlight PA State College’s investigative, public-service journalism"
title-tag = "Trivia event raises $17,000 for Spotlight PA State College"
+++

<a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/"><em>Spotlight PA</em></a><em> is an independent, nonpartisan, and nonprofit newsroom producing investigative and public-service journalism that holds power to account and drives positive change in Pennsylvania. </em><a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/newsletters"><em>Sign up for our free newsletters</em></a><em>.</em>

Our third annual “Clink and Think” Quiz Bash Fundraiser on Oct. 26 was another success at Axemann Brewery with $17,000 raised to benefit Spotlight PA’s State College regional bureau! All proceeds will support investigative and public-service journalism in State College and north-central Pennsylvania.

Thank you to Katie O’Toole, event chair, and her committee: R Thomas Berner, John Dillon, John Nichols, Constance Gildea, Lassie MacDonald, Mary Lou Bennett, Lisa Kracaw, and Nancy Chiswick.

Jeff Brown, local radio personality and PA announcer for the Bryce Jordan Center, led the teams with competitive rounds of questions about Centre County-themed trivia. The top three teams received prize packages featuring donations from Tait Farm Foods, GIANT, Crunch Fitness, Rapid Transit Sports, The Family Clothesline, Village Eatinghouse, HoneyBaked Ham, The Nittany Quill, Benny Leone’s, Angelo’s Pizzeria, Good Day Cafe, Brothers Pizza, Starbucks, Lion &amp; Cub, and the Downtown State College Improvement District.

We sincerely thank Reini Goldsmiths &amp; Jewelers, Constance Gildea, R Thomas Berner, Pat Little and The Frame Factory &amp; Gallery, the late Stuart Frost, and Karen Zwigart for their generous contributions to our silent auction.

<strong>Our most grateful thanks to our event sponsors:</strong>

Axemann Brewery

Constance Gildea and Friends

David Seltzer

Hugh and Janyce Mose

John Nichols

Katie O’Toole and Gary Gray

Lassie MacDonald

League of Women Voters of Centre County

Lion Country Kia

Lisa Kracaw and Friends

Mary Lou Bennett

Parisi Gray Wealth Management

R Thomas and Paulette Berner

The Happy Valley Adventure Bureau

The Journalism Department from the Bellisario College of Communications

The Steven Bodner Team at RE/MAX Centre Realty

Tierney Education

We’d also like to offer a special thank you to Peter Chiarkas of Kissinger, Bigatel &amp; Brower Realtors for contributing to the event.

