+++
authors = ["Min Xian"]
blurb = "State College voters will choose from six school board candidates in the fall — four registered Democrats and two registered Republicans."
byline = "Min Xian of Spotlight PA State College"
description = "State College voters will choose from six school board candidates in the fall — four registered Democrats and two registered Republicans."
feed-exclude = false
image = "2025/04/01m0-52z0-0x40-19w0.jpeg"
image-credit = "Leise Hook / For Spotlight PA"
image-description = "An illustration of the seven candidates for State College school board"
image-gravity = "ce"
internal-id = "SPLSCRESULTS0525"
kicker = "Elections"
modal-exclude = false
og-title = "These candidates won in the State College school board primaries"
pinned = false
published = 2025-05-21T11:52:30.544-04:00
slug = "state-college-pennsylvania-school-board-primary-election-results"
suppress-date = false
title = "Pa. primary election 2025: The State College school board candidates advancing to November"
title-tag = "Pa. election 2025 results: State College school board winners"
topics = ["Elections", "Local Government"]
twitter-title = "These candidates won in the State College school board primaries"
+++

STATE COLLEGE — Six candidates for State College Area School District Board of Directors, including two incumbents and four newcomers, are advancing to the general election in November, according to unofficial results for Tuesday’s primary.

They will compete for four open seats on the school board, which adopts and manages budgets, levies local taxes, adopts instruction plans, approves hiring, and appoints a district superintendent to manage day-to-day operations.

On the Democratic ticket, incumbent Deborah Anderson led the field with 5,004 votes, followed by former State College Borough Council President Jesse Barlow, who received 4,838 votes, per the Centre County election office.

Jackie Huff, another incumbent, got 4,620 votes. Newcomer Rebecca Arnold Desmarais, a small business owner, placed fourth on the ticket with 4,271 votes, securing a spot on the November ballot.

{{<embed/newsletter cta="Sign up for Talk of the Town, a weekly update of the news that matters to your community — from the PA Wilds to Happy Valley." eyebrow="Stay informed" preselect="state_college">}}

On the Republican side, voters cast 2,121 votes for homeschooling parent Kirsten McTernan, according to the latest unofficial results. State High graduate Mihaly Sogor received 1,876 votes. Anderson and Barlow also placed on the GOP ballot, with 1,080 and 996 votes, respectively.

Jennifer A. Black, a former public school teacher, is the only candidate not moving on to the general election. She was a close fifth choice for Democratic voters, winning 4,161 votes. Black is the mother of Abby Smith, a Park Forest Middle School student whose death by suicide last year prompted an external review of the district’s suicide prevention protocols.

Black conceded the race in a Facebook post. “Unfortunately, my name will not be appearing on the ballot in November,” she wrote. “I wish it had been a different outcome, but I truly appreciate your support!”

The seven candidates were cross-filed, meaning they appeared on both Democratic and Republican ballots. Pennsylvania’s closed primary system does not allow unaffiliated and third-party voters <a href="https://www.spotlightpa.org/news/2025/04/open-primaries-2025-election-legislature-pennsylvania/">to vote for candidates during spring contests</a>.

Nearly 23% of Centre County’s more than 83,000 registered Democrats and Republicans turned out for the municipal primary on Tuesday, according to the county. That’s down from nearly 30% during 2023’s primary.

{{<embed/donate>}}

The winners of the Democratic primary are closely aligned on issues facing the school district. They share views on supporting students’ social and emotional well-being, addressing mental health needs in the district, and overhauling cyber charter school funding. All four previously told Spotlight PA that the district should keep its diversity, equity, and inclusion programs for students’ benefit.

A slight divergence on school tax distinguishes them somewhat: Desmarais said she would support raising taxes, while the other three said it’s a case-by-case decision. Huff said she would like to see less reliance on property taxes when it comes to funding schools.

As for the Republican frontrunners, McTernan said her 15 years of teaching school at home drives her focus on educational standards in schools. She said it’s imperative to address the root causes of rising mental health struggles among students, and argued DEI programs are outside of the scope of the school district’s mission.

Both McTernan and Sogor emphasized fiscal responsibility with district spending. Sogar said he rejects raising taxes.

Sogor also said district policies help only a minority of students but leave many behind.

Because Anderson and Barlow won in both parties’ primary contests, they will appear as both Democratic and Republican nominees in the fall.

