content/statecollege/_index.md, before:

+++
title = "Spotlight PA State College"
link-title = "State College"
dek = "Dek content…"
title-tag = "Spotlight PA State College: North-Central Pennsylvania news and investigations"
description = "The latest State College and North-Central Pennsylvania news and investigations. Join our historic effort to invigorate local news."
image = "2022/02/01gz-k3bb-nz72-spe2.jpeg"
image-description = "Sunsrise over State College, PA"
image-credit = "Abby Drey / Centre Daily Times"

newsletter-box = "tw/newsletter-box-lg.html"
newsletter-field = "newsletter/talkofthetown-hidden.html"
newsletter-hed = "Sign Up for Talk of the Town"
newsletter-dek = "Every Thursday, you’ll get top news and notes for North-Central PA by Spotlight PA’s State College regional bureau."
river-promo-desktop-images = []
modal-exclude = true
donate-hed = "Vital Journalism for North-Central Pa."
donate-text = "Support the future of news in State College & beyond"
cta = "component/inline-cta.html"
donate-theme = "statecollege"
donate-amounts = "10,15,25"
donate-ga-campaign = "701Dn000000Ygq1IAC"
[cascade]
extended-kicker = "State College Region"
sidebar-newsletter = "tw/rail-talkofthetown.html"
nav = "statecollege"
+++
The latest State College and North-Central Pennsylvania news and investigations. Join our historic effort to invigorate local news. Spotlight PA State College: North-Central Pennsylvania news and investigations.

Commit message:

cleansup how callout-newsletter works

content/statecollege/_index.md, after:

+++
title = "Spotlight PA State College"
link-title = "State College"
dek = "Dek content…"
title-tag = "Spotlight PA State College: North-Central Pennsylvania news and investigations"
description = "The latest State College and North-Central Pennsylvania news and investigations. Join our historic effort to invigorate local news."
image = "2022/02/01gz-k3bb-nz72-spe2.jpeg"
image-description = "Sunsrise over State College, PA"
image-credit = "Abby Drey / Centre Daily Times"

newsletter-box = "tw/newsletter-box-lg.html"
newsletter-field = "newsletter/talkofthetown-hidden.html"
newsletter-hed = "Sign Up for Talk of the Town"
newsletter-dek = "Every Thursday, you’ll get top news and notes for North-Central PA by Spotlight PA’s State College regional bureau."
river-promo-desktop-images = []
modal-exclude = true
donate-hed = "Vital Journalism for North-Central Pa."
donate-text = "Support the future of news in State College & beyond"
cta = "component/inline-cta.html"
donate-theme = "statecollege"
donate-amounts = "10,15,25"
donate-ga-campaign = "701Dn000000Ygq1IAC"

callout-hed = "Latest Talk of the Town"
signup-hed = "Get the Talk of the Town"
signup-dek = "Every Thursday, get top news and notes for North-Central PA from our State College regional bureau."
signup-cta = "Subscribe"
signup-image = "2022/06/01hb-4958-4rxz-4t0q.png"
signup-field = "newsletter/talkofthetown-hidden.html"

[cascade]
extended-kicker = "State College Region"
sidebar-newsletter = "tw/rail-talkofthetown.html"
nav = "statecollege"
+++
The latest State College and North-Central Pennsylvania news and investigations. Join our historic effort to invigorate local news. Spotlight PA State College: North-Central Pennsylvania news and investigations.
